Abraham Lincoln - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Donate Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 1 Family and childhood Toggle Family and childhood subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Mothers death 1.3 Education and move to Illinois 1.4 Marriage and children 2 Early career and militia service 3 Illinois state legislature 18341842 4 U.S. House of Representatives 18471849 Toggle U.S. House of Representatives 18471849 subsection 4.1 Political views 5 Prairie lawyer 6 Republican politics 18541860 Toggle Republican politics 18541860 subsection 6.1 Emergence as Republican leader 6.1.1 1856 campaign 6.1.2 Dred Scott v. Sandford 6.2 LincolnDouglas debates and Cooper Union speech 6.3 1860 presidential election 7 Presidency 18611865 Toggle Presidency 18611865 subsection 7.1 Secession and inauguration 7.2 Civil War 7.2.1 Union military strategy 7.2.2 General McClellan 7.2.3 Emancipation Proclamation 7.2.4 Gettysburg Address 1863 7.2.5 Promoting General Grant 7.3 Reelection 7.4 Reconstruction 7.5 Native Americans 7.6 Whig theory of a presidency 7.7 Supreme Court appointments 7.8 Foreign policy 8 Assassination Toggle Assassination subsection 8.1 Funeral and burial 9 Religious and philosophical beliefs 10 Health 11 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 11.1 Republican values 11.2 Reunification of the states 11.3 Historical reputation 11.4 Memory and memorials 12 See also 13 Notes 14 References Toggle References subsection 14.1 Bibliography 15 External links Toggle External links subsection 15.1 Official 15.2 Organizations 15.3 Media coverage 15.4 Other Toggle the table of contents Abraham Lincoln 199 languages Aceh Afrikaans Alemannisch nglisc Aragones Arpetan Asturianu Avanee Aymar aru Azrbaycanca Basa Bali Ban-lam-gu Bikol Central Bislama Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Catala Cebuano Cestina Chi-Chewa ChiTumbuka Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Espanol Esperanto Euskara Fiji Hindi Froyskt Francais Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gaidhlig Galego Goychi Konknni Gungbe Hak-ka-ngi Hausa Hawaii Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Islenska Italiano Jawa Kaby Kapampangan Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Kiswahili Kreyol ayisyen Kriyol gwiyannen Kurdi Ladino Latina Latviesu Letzebuergesch Lietuviu Ligure Limburgs Lingala Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Lombard Magyar Malagasy Maori Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Ming-deng-ngu Nederlands Napulitano Nordfriisk Norsk bokmal Norsk nynorsk Novial Occitan Oromoo Ozbekcha Pangcah Papiamentu Patois Piemonteis Plattduutsch Polski Portugues Romana Romani chib Rumantsch Runa Simi Gagana Samoa Sardu Scots Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovencina Slovenscina srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Svenska Tagalog tatarca Turkce Vahcuengh Vepsan kel Tieng Viet Volapuk Winaray Yoruba Zazaki Zeeuws Zemaiteska Betawi Batak Mandailing Tolsi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia President of the United States from 1861 to 1865 For other uses see Abraham Lincoln disambiguation . President Lincoln redirects here. For the troopship see USS President Lincoln . Abraham Lincoln Lincoln in 1863 16th President of the United States In office March 4 1861 April 15 1865 Vice President Hannibal Hamlin 18611865 Andrew Johnson MarApr. 1865 Preceded by James Buchanan Succeeded by Andrew Johnson Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Illinois s 7th district In office March 4 1847 March 3 1849 Preceded by John Henry Succeeded by Thomas L. Harris Member of the Illinois House of Representatives from Sangamon County In office December 1 1834 December 4 1842 Preceded by Achilles Morris Personal details Born 1809-02-12 February 12 1809 Sinking Spring Farm Kentucky U.S. Died April 15 1865 1865-04-15 aged 56 Washington D.C. U.S. Manner of death Assassination by gunshot Resting place Lincoln Tomb Political party Whig before 1856 Republican after 1856 Other political affiliations National Union 18641865 Height 6 ft 4 in 193 cm 1 Spouse Mary Todd m. 1842 Children Robert Edward Willie Tad Parents Thomas Lincoln Nancy Hanks Relatives Lincoln family Occupation Politician lawyer Signature Military service Branchservice Illinois Militia Years of service AprilJuly 1832 Rank Captain a Private a Unit 31st Sangamon Regiment of Illinois Militia 4th Mounted Volunteer Regiment Iles Mounted Volunteers Battleswars American Indian Wars Black Hawk War Battle of Stillmans Run non-combatant Battle of Kelloggs Grove non-combatant Abraham Lincoln l k n LINK -n ; February 12 1809 April 15 1865 was the 16th president of the United States serving from 1861 until his assassination in 1865. He led the United States through the American Civil War defending the nation as a constitutional union defeating the Confederacy playing a major role in the abolition of slavery expanding the power of the federal government and modernizing the U.S. economy . Lincoln was born into poverty in a log cabin in Kentucky and was raised on the frontier mainly in Indiana . He was self-educated and became a lawyer Whig Party leader Illinois state legislator and U.S. representative from Illinois . In 1849 he returned to his successful law practice in Springfield Illinois . In 1854 angered by the KansasNebraska Act which opened the territories to slavery he re-entered politics. He soon became a leader of the new Republican Party . He reached a national audience in the 1858 Senate campaign debates against Stephen A. Douglas . Lincoln ran for president in 1860 sweeping the North to gain victory. Pro-slavery elements in the South viewed his election as a threat to slavery and Southern states began seceding from the nation . They formed the Confederate States of America which began seizing federal military bases in the South. A little over one month after Lincoln assumed the presidency Confederate forces attacked Fort Sumter a U.S. fort in South Carolina. Following the bombardment Lincoln mobilized forces to suppress the rebellion and restore the union. Lincoln a moderate Republican had to navigate a contentious array of factions with friends and opponents from both the Democratic and Republican parties. His allies the War Democrats and the Radical Republicans demanded harsh treatment of the Southern Confederates. He managed the factions by exploiting their mutual enmity carefully distributing political patronage and by appealing to the American people. Anti-war Democrats called Copperheads despised Lincoln and some irreconcilable pro-Confederate elements went so far as to plot his assassination. His Gettysburg Address came to be seen as one of the greatest and most influential statements of American national purpose. Lincoln closely supervised the strategy and tactics in the war effort including the selection of generals and implemented a naval blockade of the Souths trade. He suspended habeas corpus in Maryland and elsewhere and he averted war with Britain by defusing the Trent Affair . In 1863 he issued the Emancipation Proclamation which declared the slaves in the states in rebellion to be free. It also directed the Army and Navy to recognize and maintain the freedom of said persons and to receive them into the armed service of the United States. Lincoln unsuccessfully pressured border states to outlaw slavery and he promoted the Thirteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution which abolished slavery except as punishment for a crime. Lincoln managed his own successful re-election campaign . He sought to heal the war-torn nation through reconciliation. On April 14 1865 just five days after the Confederate surrender at Appomattox he was attending a play at Fords Theatre in Washington D.C. with his wife Mary when he was fatally shot by Confederate sympathizer John Wilkes Booth . Lincoln is remembered as a martyr and a national hero for his wartime leadership and for his efforts to preserve the Union and abolish slavery. Lincoln is often ranked in both popular and scholarly polls as the greatest president in American history. This article is part of a series about Abraham Lincoln Personal Early life and career Family Health Sexuality Patent Political Spot Resolutions Political career 18491861 LincolnDouglas debates Views on slavery Views on religion Electoral history 16th President of the United States Presidency First term Transition 1st inauguration Hannibal Hamlin American Civil War The Union Emancipation Proclamation Ten percent plan 13th Amendment Second term 2nd inauguration Andrew Johnson Reconstruction Presidential elections 1860 Convention 1864 Convention Speeches and works Inaugural speeches First Second State of the Union 1861 1862 1863 1864 Lyceum Peoria Lost Speech House Divided Cooper Union Farewell address Gettysburg Poetry The Suicides Soliloquy Bixby letter McCullough letter Assassination and legacy Assassination State funeral Historical reputation Memorials Depictions Bibliography Topical guide v t e Family and childhood Early life Main article: Early life and career of Abraham Lincoln Abraham Lincoln was born on February 12 1809 the second child of Thomas Lincoln and Nancy Hanks Lincoln in a log cabin on Sinking Spring Farm near Hodgenville Kentucky . 2 He was a descendant of Samuel Lincoln an Englishman who migrated from Hingham Norfolk to its namesake Hingham Massachusetts in 1638. The family then migrated west passing through New Jersey Pennsylvania and Virginia . 3 Lincoln was also a descendant of the Harrison family of Virginia ; his paternal grandfather and namesake Captain Abraham Lincoln and wife Bathsheba nee Herring moved the family from Virginia to Jefferson County Kentucky . b The captain was killed in an Indian raid in 1786. 5 His children including eight-year-old Thomas Abrahams father witnessed the attack. 6 c Thomas then worked at odd jobs in Kentucky and Tennessee before the family settled in Hardin County Kentucky in the early 1800s. 6 The farm site where Lincoln grew up in Spencer County Indiana Lincolns mother Nancy Lincoln is widely assumed to be the daughter of Lucy Hanks. 8 Through his mothers family he is related to American actor Tom Hanks . Thomas and Nancy married on June 12 1806 in Washington County and moved to Elizabethtown Kentucky . 9 They had three children: Sarah Abraham and Thomas who died as an infant. 10 Thomas Lincoln bought multiple farms in Kentucky but could not get clear titles to any losing hundreds of acres of land in property disputes. 11 In 1816 the family moved to Indiana where the land surveys and titles were more reliable. 12 They settled in an unbroken forest 13 in Hurricane Township Perry County Indiana . 14 When the Lincolns moved to Indiana it had just been admitted to the Union as a free non-slaveholding state 15 except that though no new enslaved people were allowed ... currently enslaved individuals remained so . 16 d In 1860 Lincoln noted that the familys move to Indiana was partly on account of slavery but mainly due to land title difficulties. 18 19 In Kentucky and Indiana Thomas worked as a farmer cabinetmaker and carpenter. 20 At various times he owned farms livestock and town lots paid taxes sat on juries appraised estates and served on county patrols. Thomas and Nancy were members of the Separate Baptist Church condemned profanity intoxication gossip horse racing and dancing. Most of its members opposed slavery. 21 Overcoming financial challenges Thomas in 1827 obtained clear title to 80 acres 32 ha in Indiana an area that became known as Little Pigeon Creek Community . 22 Mothers death On October 5 1818 Nancy Lincoln died from milk sickness leaving 11-year-old Sarah in charge of a household including her father nine-year-old Abraham and Nancys 19-year-old orphan cousin Dennis Hanks. 23 Ten years later on January 20 1828 Sarah died while giving birth to a stillborn son devastating Lincoln. 24 On December 2 1819 Thomas married Sarah Bush Johnston a widow from Elizabethtown Kentucky with three children of her own. 25 Abraham became close to his stepmother and called her Mother . 26 Dennis Hanks said he was lazy for all his readingscribblingwritingcipheringwriting poetry . 27 His stepmother acknowledged he did not enjoy physical labor but loved to read. 28 29 Education and move to Illinois Lincoln was largely self-educated. 30 His formal schooling was from itinerant teachers . It included two short stints in Kentucky where he learned to read but probably not to write. In Indiana at age seven 31 due to farm chores he attended school only sporadically for a total of fewer than 12 months in aggregate by age 15. 32 Nonetheless he remained an avid reader and retained a lifelong interest in learning. 33 Family neighbors and schoolmates recalled that his readings included the King James Bible Aesops Fables John Bunyan s The Pilgrims Progress Daniel Defoe s Robinson Crusoe and The Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin . 34 Despite being self-educated Lincoln was the recipient of honorary degrees later in life including an honorary Doctor of Laws from Columbia University in June 1861. 35 When Lincoln was a teen his father grew more and more to depend on him for the farming grubbing hoeing making fences necessary to keep the family afloat. He also regularly hired his son out to work ... and by law he was entitled to everything the boy earned until he came of age . 36 Lincoln was tall strong and athletic and became adept at using an ax. 37 He was an active wrestler during his youth and trained in the rough catch-as-catch-can style also known as catch wrestling. He became county wrestling champion at the age of 21. 38 He gained a reputation for his strength and audacity after winning a wrestling match with the renowned leader of ruffians known as the Clarys Grove boys. 39 In March 1830 fearing another milk sickness outbreak several members of the extended Lincoln family including Abraham moved west to Illinois a free state and settled in Macon County . 40 e Abraham then became increasingly distant from Thomas in part due to his fathers lack of interest in education. 42 In 1831 as Thomas and other family members prepared to move to a new homestead in Coles County Illinois Abraham struck out on his own. 43 He made his home in New Salem Illinois for six years. 44 Lincoln and some friends took goods including live hogs by flatboat to New Orleans Louisiana where he first witnessed slavery. 45 Marriage and children Further information: Lincoln family Health of Abraham Lincoln and Sexuality of Abraham Lincoln 1864 photo of President Lincoln with youngest son Tad Mary Todd Lincoln wife of Abraham Lincoln in 1861 Speculation persists that Lincolns first romantic interest was Ann Rutledge whom he met when he moved to New Salem. However witness testimony given decades afterward showed a lack of any specific recollection of a romance between the two. 46 Rutledge died on August 25 1835 most likely of typhoid fever ; Lincoln took the death very hard saying that he could not bear the idea of rain falling on Anns grave. Lincoln sank into a serious episode of depression and this gave rise to speculation that he had been in love with her. 47 48 49 In the early 1830s he met Mary Owens from Kentucky. 50 Late in 1836 Lincoln agreed to a match with Owens if she returned to New Salem. Owens arrived that November and he courted her; however they both had second thoughts. On August 16 1837 he wrote Owens a letter saying he would not blame her if she ended the relationship and she never replied. 51 In 1839 Lincoln met Mary Todd in Springfield Illinois and the following year they became engaged. 52 She was the daughter of Robert Smith Todd a wealthy lawyer and businessman in Lexington Kentucky . 53 Their wedding which was set for January 1 1841 was canceled because Lincoln did not appear but they reconciled and married on November 4 1842 in the Springfield home of Marys sister. 54 While anxiously preparing for the nuptials he was asked where he was going and replied To hell I suppose . 55 In 1844 the couple bought a house in Springfield near his law office. Mary kept house with the help of a hired servant and a relative. 56 Lincoln was an affectionate husband and father of four sons though his work regularly kept him away from home. The eldest Robert Todd Lincoln was born in 1843 and was the only child to live to maturity. Edward Baker Lincoln Eddie born in 1846 died February 1 1850 probably of tuberculosis. Lincolns third son Willie Lincoln was born on December 21 1850 and died of a fever at the White House on February 20 1862. The youngest Thomas Tad Lincoln was born on April 4 1853 and survived his father but died of heart failure at age 18 on July 16 1871. 57 f Lincoln was remarkably fond of children 59 and the Lincolns were not considered to be strict with their own. 60 In fact Lincolns law partner William H. Herndon would grow irritated when Lincoln brought his children to the law office. Their father it seemed was often too absorbed in his work to notice his childrens behavior. Herndon recounted I have felt many and many a time that I wanted to wring their little necks and yet out of respect for Lincoln I kept my mouth shut. Lincoln did not note what his children were doing or had done. 61 The deaths of their sons Eddie and Willie had profound effects on both parents. Lincoln suffered from melancholy a condition now thought to be clinical depression . 48 Later in life Mary struggled with the stresses of losing her husband and sons and in 1875 Robert committed her to an asylum. 62 Early career and militia service Further information: Early life and career of Abraham Lincoln and Abraham Lincoln in the Black Hawk War During 1831 and 1832 Lincoln worked at a general store in New Salem Illinois . In 1832 he declared his candidacy for the Illinois House of Representatives but interrupted his campaign to serve as a captain in the Illinois Militia during the Black Hawk War . 63 When Lincoln returned home from the Black Hawk War he planned to become a blacksmith but instead formed a partnership with 21-year-old William Berry with whom he purchased a New Salem general store on credit. Because a license was required to sell customers beverages Berry obtained bartending licenses for 7 each for Lincoln and himself and in 1833 the Lincoln-Berry General Store became a tavern as well. citation needed As licensed bartenders Lincoln and Berry were able to sell spirits including liquor for 12 cents a pint. They offered a wide range of alcoholic beverages as well as food including takeout dinners. But Berry became an alcoholic was often too drunk to work and Lincoln ended up running the store by himself. 64 Although the economy was booming the business struggled and went into debt causing Lincoln to sell his share. citation needed In his first campaign speech after returning from his military service Lincoln observed a supporter in the crowd under attack grabbed the assailant by his neck and the seat of his trousers and tossed him. 40 In the campaign Lincoln advocated for navigational improvements on the Sangamon River . He could draw crowds as a raconteur but lacked the requisite formal education powerful friends and money and lost the election. 65 Lincoln finished eighth out of 13 candidates the top four were elected though he received 277 of the 300 votes cast in the New Salem precinct. 66 Lincoln served as New Salems postmaster and later as county surveyor but continued his voracious reading and decided to become a lawyer. 67 Rather than studying in the office of an established attorney as was the custom Lincoln borrowed legal texts from attorneys John Todd Stuart and Thomas Drummond purchased books including Blackstone s Commentaries and Chitty s Pleadings and read law on his own. 67 He later said of his legal education that I studied with nobody. 68 Illinois state legislature 18341842 Lincolns home in Springfield Illinois Lincolns second state house campaign in 1834 this time as a Whig was a success over a powerful Whig opponent. 69 Then followed his four terms in the Illinois House of Representatives for Sangamon County . 70 He championed construction of the Illinois and Michigan Canal and later was a Canal Commissioner. 71 He voted to expand suffrage beyond white landowners to all white males but adopted a free soil stance opposing both slavery and abolition . 72 In 1837 he declared The Institution of slavery is founded on both injustice and bad policy but the promulgation of abolition doctrines tends rather to increase than abate its evils. 73 He echoed Henry Clay s support for the American Colonization Society which advocated a program of abolition in conjunction with settling freed slaves in Liberia . 74 He was admitted to the Illinois bar on September 9 1836 75 76 and moved to Springfield and began to practice law under John T. Stuart Mary Todds cousin. 77 Lincoln emerged as a formidable trial combatant during cross-examinations and closing arguments. He partnered several years with Stephen T. Logan and in 1844 began his practice with William Herndon a studious young man . 78 On January 27 1838 Abraham Lincoln then 28 years old delivered his first major speech at the Lyceum in Springfield Illinois after the murder of newspaper editor Elijah Parish Lovejoy in Alton. Lincoln warned that no trans-Atlantic military giant could ever crush the U.S. as a nation. It cannot come from abroad. If destruction be our lot we must ourselves be its author and finisher said Lincoln. 79 80 Prior to that on April 28 1836 a black man Francis McIntosh was burned alive in St. Louis Missouri . Zann Gill describes how these two murders set off a chain reaction that ultimately prompted Abraham Lincoln to run for President. 81 U.S. House of Representatives 18471849 Lincoln in his late 30s as a member of the U.S. House of Representatives around 1846 1846 Illinois U.S. House District 7 results by county Lincoln 30-40 50-60 60-70 70-80 Cartwright 50-60 True to his record Lincoln professed to friends in 1861 to be an old line Whig a disciple of Henry Clay . 82 Their party favored economic modernization in banking tariffs to fund internal improvements including railroads and urbanization. 83 In 1843 Lincoln sought the Whig nomination for Illinoiss 7th district seat in the U.S. House of Representatives ; he was defeated by John J. Hardin though he prevailed with the party in limiting Hardin to one term. Lincoln not only pulled off his strategy of gaining the nomination in 1846 but also won the election. He was the only Whig in the Illinois delegation but as dutiful as any participated in almost all votes and made speeches that toed the party line. 84 He was assigned to the Committee on Post Office and Post Roads and the Committee on Expenditures in the War Department . 85 Lincoln teamed with Joshua R. Giddings on a bill to abolish slavery in the District of Columbia with compensation for the owners enforcement to capture fugitive slaves and a popular vote on the matter. He dropped the bill when it eluded Whig support. 86 87 Political views On foreign and military policy Lincoln spoke against the MexicanAmerican War which he imputed President James K. Polk s desire for military glory that attractive rainbow that rises in showers of blood . 88 He supported the Wilmot Proviso a failed proposal to ban slavery in any U.S. territory won from Mexico. 89 Lincoln emphasized his opposition to Polk by drafting and introducing his Spot Resolutions . The war had begun with a killing of American soldiers by Mexican cavalry patrol in disputed territory and Polk insisted that Mexican soldiers had invaded our territory and shed the blood of our fellow-citizens on our own soil . 90 Lincoln demanded that Polk show Congress the exact spot on which blood had been shed and prove that the spot was on American soil. 91 The resolution was ignored in both Congress and the national papers and it cost Lincoln political support in his district. One Illinois newspaper derisively nicknamed him spotty Lincoln . 92 Lincoln later regretted some of his statements especially his attack on presidential war-making powers. 93 Lincoln had pledged in 1846 to serve only one term in the House. Realizing Clay was unlikely to win the presidency he supported General Zachary Taylor for the Whig nomination in the 1848 presidential election . 94 Taylor won and Lincoln hoped in vain to be appointed Commissioner of the United States General Land Office . 95 The administration offered to appoint him secretary or governor of the Oregon Territory as consolation. 96 This distant territory was a Democratic stronghold and acceptance of the post would have disrupted his legal and political career in Illinois so he declined and resumed his law practice. 97 Prairie lawyer See also: List of cases involving Abraham Lincoln Lincoln in 1857 In his Springfield practice Lincoln handled every kind of business that could come before a prairie lawyer . 98 Twice a year he appeared for 10 consecutive weeks in county seats in the Midstate county courts; this continued for 16 years. 99 Lincoln handled transportation cases in the midst of the nations western expansion particularly river barge conflicts under the many new railroad bridges. As a riverboat man Lincoln initially favored those interests but ultimately represented whoever hired him. 100 He later represented a bridge company against a riverboat company in Hurd v. Rock Island Bridge Company a landmark case involving a canal boat that sank after hitting a bridge. 101 In 1849 he received a patent for a flotation device for the movement of boats in shallow water. The idea was never commercialized but it made Lincoln the only president to hold a patent. 102 Lincoln appeared before the Illinois Supreme Court in 175 cases; he was sole counsel in 51 cases of which 31 were decided in his favor. 103 From 1853 to 1860 one of his largest clients was the Illinois Central Railroad . 104 His legal reputation gave rise to the nickname Honest Abe . 105 In an 1858 criminal trial Lincoln represented William Duff Armstrong who was on trial for the murder of James Preston Metzker. 106 The case is famous for Lincolns use of a fact established by judicial notice to challenge the credibility of an eyewitness. After an opposing witness testified to seeing the crime in the moonlight Lincoln produced a Farmers Almanac showing the Moon was at a low angle drastically reducing visibility. Armstrong was acquitted. 106 In an 1859 murder case leading up to his presidential campaign Lincoln elevated his profile with his defense of Simeon Quinn Peachy Harrison who was a third cousin; g Harrison was also the grandson of Lincolns political opponent Rev. Peter Cartwright . 108 Harrison was charged with the murder of Greek Crafton who as he lay dying of his wounds confessed to Cartwright that he had provoked Harrison. 109 Lincoln angrily protested the judges initial decision to exclude Cartwrights testimony about the confession as inadmissible hearsay . Lincoln argued that the testimony involved a dying declaration and was not subject to the hearsay rule. Instead of holding Lincoln in contempt of court as expected the judge a Democrat reversed his ruling and admitted the testimony into evidence resulting in Harrisons acquittal. 106 Republican politics 18541860 Main article: Abraham Lincoln in politics 18491861 Emergence as Republican leader Further information: Slave states and free states and Abraham Lincoln and slavery Lincoln in 1858 the year of his debates with Stephen Douglas over slavery The debate over the status of slavery in the territories failed to alleviate tensions between the slave-holding South and the free North with the failure of the Compromise of 1850 a legislative package designed to address the issue. 110 In his 1852 eulogy for Clay Lincoln highlighted the latters support for gradual emancipation and opposition to both extremes on the slavery issue. 111 As the slavery debate in the Nebraska and Kansas territories became particularly acrimonious Illinois Senator Stephen A. Douglas proposed popular sovereignty as a compromise; the measure would allow the electorate of each territory to decide the status of slavery. The legislation alarmed many Northerners who sought to prevent the spread of slavery that could result but Douglass KansasNebraska Act narrowly passed Congress in May 1854. 112 Lincoln did not comment on the act until months later in his Peoria Speech of October 1854. Lincoln then declared his opposition to slavery which he repeated en route to the presidency. 113 He said the Kansas Act had a declared indifference but as I must think a covert real zeal for the spread of slavery. I cannot but hate it. I hate it because of the monstrous injustice of slavery itself. I hate it because it deprives our republican example of its just influence in the world.... 114 Lincolns attacks on the KansasNebraska Act marked his return to political life. 115 Nationally the Whigs were irreparably split by the KansasNebraska Act and other efforts to compromise on the slavery issue. Reflecting on the demise of his party Lincoln wrote in 1855 I think I am a Whig but others say there are no Whigs and that I am an abolitionist. ... I do no more than oppose the extension of slavery. 116 The new Republican Party was formed as a northern party dedicated to antislavery drawing from the antislavery wing of the Whig Party and combining Free Soil Liberty and antislavery Democratic Party members 117 Lincoln resisted early Republican entreaties fearing that the new party would become a platform for extreme abolitionists. 118 Lincoln held out hope for rejuvenating the Whigs though he lamented his partys growing closeness with the nativist Know Nothing movement. 119 In 1854 Lincoln was elected to the Illinois legislature but before the term began in January he declined to take his seat so that he would be eligible to be a candidate in the upcoming U.S. Senate election. 120 121 The years elections showed the strong opposition to the KansasNebraska Act and in the aftermath Lincoln sought election to the U.S. Senate. 115 At that time senators were elected by state legislatures. 122 After leading in the first six rounds of voting he was unable to obtain a majority. Lincoln instructed his backers to vote for Lyman Trumbull . Trumbull was an antislavery Democrat and had received few votes in the earlier ballots; his supporters also antislavery Democrats had vowed not to support any Whig. Lincolns decision to withdraw enabled his Whig supporters and Trumbulls antislavery Democrats to combine and defeat the mainstream Democratic candidate Joel Aldrich Matteson . 123 1856 campaign Violent political confrontations in Kansas continued and opposition to the KansasNebraska Act remained strong throughout the North. As the 1856 elections approached Lincoln joined the Republicans and attended the Bloomington Convention which formally established the Illinois Republican Party . The convention platform endorsed Congresss right to regulate slavery in the territories and backed the admission of Kansas as a free state. Lincoln gave the final speech of the convention supporting the party platform and called for the preservation of the Union. 124 At the June 1856 Republican National Convention though Lincoln received support to run as vice president John C. Fremont and William Dayton were on the ticket which Lincoln supported throughout Illinois. The Democrats nominated former Secretary of State James Buchanan and the Know-Nothings nominated former Whig President Millard Fillmore . 125 Buchanan prevailed while Republican William Henry Bissell won election as Governor of Illinois and Lincoln became a leading Republican in Illinois. 126 h Dred Scott v. Sandford Dred Scott was a slave whose master took him from a slave state to a territory that was free as a result of the Missouri Compromise . After Scott was returned to the slave state he petitioned a federal court for his freedom. His petition was denied in Dred Scott v. Sandford 1857. i In his opinion Supreme Court Chief Justice Roger B. Taney wrote that black people were not citizens and derived no rights from the Constitution and that the Missouri Compromise was unconstitutional for infringing upon slave owners property rights. While many Democrats hoped that Dred Scott would end the dispute over slavery in the territories the decision sparked further outrage in the North. 129 Lincoln denounced it as the product of a conspiracy of Democrats to support the Slave Power . 130 He argued the decision was at variance with the Declaration of Independence; he said that while the founding fathers did not believe all men equal in every respect they believed all men were equal in certain inalienable rights among which are life liberty and the pursuit of happiness . 131 LincolnDouglas debates and Cooper Union speech Further information: LincolnDouglas debates and Cooper Union speech In 1858 Douglas was up for re-election in the U.S. Senate and Lincoln hoped to defeat him. Many in the party felt that a former Whig should be nominated in 1858 and Lincolns 1856 campaigning and support of Trumbull had earned him a favor. 132 Some eastern Republicans supported Douglas for his opposition to the Lecompton Constitution and admission of Kansas as a slave state . 133 Many Illinois Republicans resented this eastern interference. For the first time Illinois Republicans held a convention to agree upon a Senate candidate and Lincoln won the nomination with little opposition. 134 Abraham Lincoln a portrait by Mathew Brady taken February 27 1860 the day of Lincolns Cooper Union speech in New York City Lincoln accepted the nomination with great enthusiasm and zeal. After his nomination he delivered his House Divided Speech with the biblical reference Mark 3:25 A house divided against itself cannot stand. I believe this government cannot endure permanently half slave and half free. I do not expect the Union to be dissolvedI do not expect the house to fallbut I do expect it will cease to be divided. It will become all one thing or all the other. 135 The speech created a stark image of the danger of disunion. 136 The stage was then set for the election of the Illinois legislature which would in turn select Lincoln or Douglas. 137 When informed of Lincolns nomination Douglas stated Lincoln is the strong man of the party ... and if I beat him my victory will be hardly won. 138 The Senate campaign featured seven debates between Lincoln and Douglas. These were the most famous political debates in American history; they had an atmosphere akin to a prizefight and drew crowds in the thousands. 139 The principals stood in stark contrast both physically and politically. Lincoln warned that the Slave Power was threatening the values of republicanism and he accused Douglas of distorting the Founding Fathers premise that all men are created equal . In his Freeport Doctrine Douglas argued that despite the Dred Scott decision which he claimed to support 140 local settlers under the doctrine of popular sovereignty should be free to choose whether to allow slavery within their territory and he accused Lincoln of having joined the abolitionists. 141 Lincolns argument assumed a moral tone as he claimed that Douglas represented a conspiracy to promote slavery. Douglass argument was more legal in nature claiming that Lincoln was defying the authority of the U.S. Supreme Court as exercised in the Dred Scott decision. 142 Though the Republican legislative candidates won more popular votes the Democrats won more seats and the legislature re-elected Douglas. However Lincolns articulation of the issues had given him a national political presence. 143 In May 1859 Lincoln purchased the Illinois Staats-Anzeiger a German-language newspaper that was consistently supportive; most of the states 130 000 German Americans voted for Democrats but the German-language paper mobilized Republican support. 144 In the aftermath of the 1858 election newspapers frequently mentioned Lincoln as a potential Republican presidential candidate rivaled by William H. Seward Salmon P. Chase Edward Bates and Simon Cameron . While Lincoln was popular in the Midwest he lacked support in the Northeast and was unsure whether to seek the office. 145 In January 1860 Lincoln told a group of political allies that he would accept the presidential nomination if offered and in the following months several local papers endorsed his candidacy. 146 Over the coming months Lincoln was tireless making nearly fifty speeches along the campaign trail. By the quality and simplicity of his rhetoric he quickly became the champion of the Republican party. However despite his overwhelming support in the Midwestern United States he was less appreciated in the east. Horace Greeley editor of the New York Tribune at that time wrote up an unflattering account of Lincolns compromising position on slavery and his reluctance to challenge the courts Dred Scott ruling which was promptly used against him by his political rivals. 147 148 On February 27 1860 powerful New York Republicans invited Lincoln to give a speech at Cooper Union in which he argued that the Founding Fathers of the United States had little use for popular sovereignty and had repeatedly sought to restrict slavery. He insisted that morality required opposition to slavery and rejected any groping for some middle ground between the right and the wrong . 149 Many in the audience thought he appeared awkward and even ugly. 150 But Lincoln demonstrated intellectual leadership which brought him into contention. Journalist Noah Brooks reported No man ever before made such an impression on his first appeal to a New York audience . 151 Historian David Herbert Donald described the speech as a superb political move for an unannounced presidential aspirant. Appearing in Sewards home state sponsored by a group largely loyal to Chase Lincoln shrewdly made no reference to either of these Republican rivals for the nomination. 152 In response to an inquiry about his ambitions Lincoln said The taste is in my mouth a little . 153 1860 presidential election Main article: 1860 United States presidential election The Rail Candidate Lincolns 1860 platform portrayed as being held up by a slave and his party In the 1860 presidential election northern and western electoral votes shown in red put Lincoln into the White House . On May 910 1860 the Illinois Republican State Convention was held in Decatur . 154 Lincolns followers organized a campaign team led by David Davis Norman Judd Leonard Swett and Jesse DuBois and Lincoln received his first endorsement. 155 Exploiting his embellished frontier legend clearing land and splitting fence rails Lincolns supporters adopted the label of The Rail Candidate . 156 In 1860 Lincoln described himself: I am in height six feet four inches nearly; lean in flesh weighing on an average one hundred and eighty pounds; dark complexion with coarse black hair and gray eyes. 157 Michael Martinez wrote about the effective imaging of Lincoln by his campaign. At times he was presented as the plain-talking Rail Splitter and at other times he was Honest Abe unpolished but trustworthy. 158 On May 18 at the Republican National Convention in Chicago Lincoln won the nomination on the third ballot beating candidates such as Seward and Chase. A former Democrat Hannibal Hamlin of Maine was nominated for vice president to balance the ticket . Lincolns success depended on his campaign team his reputation as a moderate on the slavery issue and his strong support for internal improvements and the tariff. 159 Pennsylvania put him over the top led by the states iron interests who were reassured by his tariff support. 160 Lincolns managers had focused on this delegation while honoring Lincolns dictate to Make no contracts that will bind me . 161 As the Slave Power tightened its grip on the national government most Republicans agreed with Lincoln that the North was the aggrieved party. Throughout the 1850s Lincoln had doubted the prospects of civil war and his supporters rejected claims that his election would incite secession. 162 When Douglas was selected as the candidate of the Northern Democrats delegates from eleven slave states walked out of the Democratic convention ; they opposed Douglass position on popular sovereignty and selected incumbent Vice President John C. Breckinridge as their candidate. 163 A group of former Whigs and Know Nothings formed the Constitutional Union Party and nominated John Bell of Tennessee. Lincoln and Douglas competed for votes in the North while Bell and Breckinridge primarily found support in the South. 132 Before the Republican convention the Lincoln campaign began cultivating a nationwide youth organization the Wide Awakes which it used to generate popular support throughout the country to spearhead voter registration drives thinking that new voters and young voters tended to embrace new parties. 164 People of the Northern states knew the Southern states would vote against Lincoln and rallied supporters for Lincoln. 165 As Douglas and the other candidates campaigned Lincoln gave no speeches relying on the enthusiasm of the Republican Party. The party did the leg work that produced majorities across the North and produced an abundance of campaign posters leaflets and newspaper editorials. Republican speakers focused first on the party platform and second on Lincolns life story emphasizing his childhood poverty. The goal was to demonstrate the power of free labor which allowed a common farm boy to work his way to the top by his own efforts. 166 The Republican Partys production of campaign literature dwarfed the combined opposition; a Chicago Tribune writer produced a pamphlet that detailed Lincolns life and sold 100 000200 000 copies. 167 Though he did not give public appearances many sought to visit him and write him. In the runup to the election he took an office in the Illinois state capitol to deal with the influx of attention. He also hired John George Nicolay as his personal secretary who would remain in that role during the presidency. 168 On November 6 1860 Lincoln was elected the 16th president. He was the first Republican president and his victory was entirely due to his support in the North and West. No ballots were cast for him in 10 of the 15 Southern slave states and he won only two of 996 counties in all the Southern states an omen of the impending Civil War. 169 170 Lincoln received 1 866 452 votes or 39.8 of the total in a four-way race carrying the free Northern states as well as California and Oregon. 171 His victory in the Electoral College was decisive: Lincoln had 180 votes to 123 for his opponents. 172 Presidency 18611865 Main article: Presidency of Abraham Lincoln Secession and inauguration Main article: Presidential transition of Abraham Lincoln Further information: Secession winter and Baltimore Plot Lincolns first inaugural at the United States Capitol March 4 1861. The Capitol dome above the rotunda was still under construction. Headines in The New York Times following Lincolns first inauguration portended imminent hostilities; less than six weeks later the Confederate Army attacked Fort Sumter launching the American Civil War . 173 The South was outraged by Lincolns election and in response secessionists implemented plans to leave the Union before he took office in March 1861. 174 On December 20 1860 South Carolina took the lead by adopting an ordinance of secession; by February 1 1861 Florida Mississippi Alabama Georgia Louisiana and Texas followed. 175 Six of these states declared themselves to be a sovereign nation the Confederate States of America and adopted a constitution. 176 The upper South and border states Delaware Maryland Virginia North Carolina Tennessee Kentucky Missouri and Arkansas initially rejected the secessionist appeal. 177 President Buchanan and President-elect Lincoln refused to recognize the Confederacy declaring secession illegal. 178 The Confederacy selected Jefferson Davis as its provisional president on February 9 1861. 179 Attempts at compromise followed but Lincoln and the Republicans rejected the proposed Crittenden Compromise as contrary to the Partys platform of free-soil in the territories . 180 Lincoln said I will suffer death before I consent ... to any concession or compromise which looks like buying the privilege to take possession of this government to which we have a constitutional right . 181 Lincoln supported the Corwin Amendment to the Constitution which passed Congress and was awaiting ratification by the states when Lincoln took office. That doomed amendment would have protected slavery in states where it already existed. 182 On March 4 1861 in his first inaugural address Lincoln said that because he holds such a provision to now be implied constitutional law I have no objection to its being made express and irrevocable . 183 A few weeks before the war Lincoln sent a letter to every governor informing them Congress had passed a joint resolution to amend the Constitution. 184 On February 11 1861 Lincoln gave a particularly emotional farewell address upon leaving Springfield; he would never again return to Springfield alive. 185 186 Lincoln traveled east in a special train. Due to secessionist plots a then-unprecedented attention to security was given to him and his train. En route to his inauguration Lincoln addressed crowds and legislatures across the North. 187 The president-elect evaded suspected assassins in Baltimore . He traveled in disguise wearing a soft felt hat instead of his customary stovepipe hat and draping an overcoat over his shoulders while hunching slightly to conceal his height. His friend Congressman Elihu B. Washburne recognized him on the platform upon arrival and loudly called out to him. 188 On February 23 1861 he arrived in Washington D.C. which was placed under substantial military guard. 189 Lincoln directed his inaugural address to the South proclaiming once again that he had no inclination to abolish slavery in the Southern states: Apprehension seems to exist among the people of the Southern States that by the accession of a Republican Administration their property and their peace and personal security are to be endangered. There has never been any reasonable cause for such apprehension. Indeed the most ample evidence to the contrary has all the while existed and been open to their inspection. It is found in nearly all the published speeches of him who now addresses you. I do but quote from one of those speeches when I declare that I have no purpose directly or indirectly to interfere with the institution of slavery in the States where it exists. I believe I have no lawful right to do so and I have no inclination to do so. First inaugural address 4 March 1861 190 191 Lincoln cited his plans for banning the expansion of slavery as the key source of conflict between North and South stating One section of our country believes slavery is right and ought to be extended while the other believes it is wrong and ought not to be extended. This is the only substantial dispute. The president ended his address with an appeal to the people of the South: We are not enemies but friends. We must not be enemies.... The mystic chords of memory stretching from every battlefield and patriot grave to every living heart and hearthstone all over this broad land will yet swell the chorus of the Union when again touched as surely they will be by the better angels of our nature. 192 The failure of the Peace Conference of 1861 signaled that legislative compromise was impossible. By March 1861 no leaders of the insurrection had proposed rejoining the Union on any terms. Meanwhile Lincoln and the Republican leadership agreed that the dismantling of the Union could not be tolerated. 193 In his second inaugural address Lincoln looked back on the situation at the time and said: Both parties deprecated war but one of them would make war rather than let the Nation survive and the other would accept war rather than let it perish and the war came. Civil War Main articles: American Civil War and Battle of Fort Sumter President Lincoln in 1861 Major Robert Anderson commander of the Unions Fort Sumter in Charleston South Carolina sent a request for provisions to Washington and Lincolns order to meet that request was seen by the secessionists as an act of war. On April 12 1861 Confederate forces fired on Union troops at Fort Sumter and began the fight. Historian Allan Nevins argued that the newly inaugurated Lincoln made three miscalculations: underestimating the gravity of the crisis exaggerating the strength of Unionist sentiment in the South and overlooking Southern Unionist opposition to an invasion. 194 William Tecumseh Sherman talked to Lincoln during inauguration week and was sadly disappointed at his failure to realize that the country was sleeping on a volcano and that the South was preparing for war. 195 Donald concludes His repeated efforts to avoid collision in the months between inauguration and the firing on Fort Sumter showed he adhered to his vow not to be the first to shed fraternal blood. But he had also vowed not to surrender the forts.... The only resolution of these contradictory positions was for the Confederates to fire the first shot . They did just that. 196 On April 15 Lincoln called on the states to send a total of 75 000 volunteer troops to recapture forts protect Washington and preserve the Union which in his view remained intact despite the seceding states. This call forced states to choose sides. Virginia seceded and was rewarded with the designation of Richmond as the Confederate capital despite its exposure to Union lines. North Carolina Tennessee and Arkansas followed over the following two months. Secession sentiment was strong in Missouri and Maryland but did not prevail; Kentucky remained neutral. 197 The Fort Sumter attack rallied Americans north of the Mason-Dixon line to defend the nation. As states sent Union regiments south on April 19 Baltimore mobs in control of the rail links attacked Union troops who were changing trains. Local leaders groups later burned critical rail bridges to the capital and the Army responded by arresting local Maryland officials. Lincoln suspended the writ of habeas corpus in an effort to protect the troops trying to reach Washington. 198 John Merryman one Maryland official hindering the U.S. troop movements petitioned Supreme Court Chief Justice Roger B. Taney to issue a writ of habeas corpus. In June in Ex parte Merryman Taney not ruling on behalf of the Supreme Court 199 issued the writ believing that Article I section 9 of the Constitution authorized only Congress and not the president to suspend it. But Lincoln invoked nonacquiescence and persisted with the policy of suspension in select areas. 200 201 Union military strategy Lincoln took executive control of the war and shaped the Union military strategy. He responded to the unprecedented political and military crisis as commander-in-chief by exercising unprecedented authority. He expanded his war powers imposed a blockade on Confederate ports disbursed funds before appropriation by Congress suspended habeas corpus and arrested and imprisoned thousands of suspected Confederate sympathizers. Lincoln gained the support of Congress and the northern public for these actions. Lincoln also had to reinforce Union sympathies in the border slave states and keep the war from becoming an international conflict. 202 Running the Machine : an 1864 political cartoon satirizing Lincolns administration featuring William Fessenden Edwin Stanton William Seward Gideon Welles Lincoln and others It was clear from the outset that bipartisan support was essential to success and that any compromise alienated factions on both sides of the aisle such as the appointment of Republicans and Democrats to command positions. Copperheads criticized Lincoln for refusing to compromise on slavery. The Radical Republicans criticized him for moving too slowly in abolishing slavery. 203 On August 6 1861 Lincoln signed the Confiscation Act of 1861 which authorized judicial proceedings to confiscate and free slaves who were used to support the Confederates. The law had little practical effect but it signaled political support for abolishing slavery. 204 In August 1861 General John C. Fremont the 1856 Republican presidential nominee without consulting Washington issued a martial edict freeing slaves of the rebels. Lincoln canceled the proclamation as violating the Confiscation Act of 1861 and beyond Fremonts authority to issue. 205 As a result Union enlistments from Maryland Kentucky and Missouri increased by over 40 000. 206 Internationally Lincoln wanted to forestall foreign military aid to the Confederacy. 207 He relied on his combative Secretary of State William Seward while working closely with Senate Foreign Relations Committee chairman Charles Sumner . 208 In the 1861 Trent Affair which threatened war with Great Britain the U.S. Navy illegally intercepted a British mail ship the Trent on the high seas and seized two Confederate envoys; Britain protested vehemently while the U.S. cheered. Lincoln ended the crisis by releasing the two diplomats. Biographer James G. Randall dissected Lincolns successful techniques: 209 his restraint his avoidance of any outward expression of truculence his early softening of State Departments attitude toward Britain his deference toward Seward and Sumner his withholding of his paper prepared for the occasion his readiness to arbitrate his golden silence in addressing Congress his shrewdness in recognizing that war must be averted and his clear perception that a point could be clinched for Americas true position at the same time that full satisfaction was given to a friendly country. Lincoln painstakingly monitored the telegraph reports coming into the War Department. He tracked all phases of the effort consulting with governors and selecting generals based on their success their state and their party. In January 1862 after complaints of inefficiency and profiteering in the War Department Lincoln replaced War Secretary Simon Cameron with Edwin Stanton . Stanton centralized the War Departments activities auditing and canceling contracts saving the federal government 17 000 000. 210 Stanton was a staunch Unionist pro-business conservative Democrat who gravitated toward the Radical Republican faction. He worked more often and more closely with Lincoln than did any other senior official. Stanton and Lincoln virtually conducted the war together say Thomas and Hyman. 211 Lincolns war strategy had two priorities: ensuring that Washington was well-defended and conducting an aggressive war effort for a prompt decisive victory. j Twice a week Lincoln met with his cabinet in the afternoon. Occasionally Mary prevailed on him to take a carriage ride concerned that he was working too hard. 213 For his edification Lincoln relied upon a book by his chief of staff General Henry Halleck entitled Elements of Military Art and Science ; Halleck was a disciple of the European strategist Antoine-Henri Jomini . Lincoln began to appreciate the critical need to control strategic points such as the Mississippi River . 214 Lincoln saw the importance of Vicksburg and understood the necessity of defeating the enemys army rather than merely capturing territory. 215 In directing the Unions war strategy Lincoln valued the advice of Gen. Winfield Scott even after his retirement as Commanding General of the United States Army . On June 2324 1862 Lincoln made an unannounced visit to West Point where he spent five hours consulting with Scott regarding the handling of the Civil War and the staffing of the War Department . 216 217 General McClellan After the Union rout at Bull Run and Winfield Scott s retirement Lincoln appointed Major General George B. McClellan general-in-chief. 218 McClellan then took months to plan his Virginia Peninsula Campaign . McClellans slow progress frustrated Lincoln as did his position that no troops were needed to defend Washington. McClellan in turn blamed the failure of the campaign on Lincolns reservation of troops for the capital. 219 The image on the left shows Lincoln with officers after the Battle of Antietam . Notable figures from left are 1. Col. Delos Sackett ; 4. Gen. George W. Morell ; 5. Alexander S. Webb Chief of Staff V Corps; 6. McClellan;. 8. Jonathan Letterman ; 10. Lincoln; 11. Henry J. Hunt ; 12. Fitz John Porter ; 15. Andrew A. Humphreys ; 16. Capt. George Armstrong Custer . The image on the right shows Lincoln and McClellan on October 3 1862. In 1862 Lincoln removed McClellan for the generals continued inaction. He elevated Henry Halleck in July and appointed John Pope as head of the new Army of Virginia . 220 Pope satisfied Lincolns desire to advance on Richmond from the north thereby protecting Washington from counterattack. 221 But in the summer of 1862 Pope was soundly defeated at the Second Battle of Bull Run forcing the Army of the Potomac back to defend Washington. 222 Despite his dissatisfaction with McClellans failure to reinforce Pope Lincoln restored him to command of all forces around Washington. 223 Two days after McClellans return to command General Robert E. Lee s forces crossed the Potomac River into Maryland leading to the Battle of Antietam . 224 That battle a Union victory was among the bloodiest in American history; it facilitated Lincolns Emancipation Proclamation in January. 225 McClellan then resisted the presidents demand that he pursue Lees withdrawing army while General Don Carlos Buell likewise refused orders to move the Army of the Ohio against rebel forces in eastern Tennessee. Lincoln replaced Buell with William Rosecrans ; and after the 1862 midterm elections he replaced McClellan with Ambrose Burnside . The appointments were both politically neutral and adroit on Lincolns part. 226 Against presidential advice Burnside launched an offensive across the Rappahannock River and was defeated by Lee at Fredericksburg in December. Desertions during 1863 came in the thousands and only increased after Fredericksburg so Lincoln replaced Burnside with Joseph Hooker . 227 In the 1862 midterm elections the Republicans suffered severe losses due to rising inflation high taxes rumors of corruption suspension of habeas corpus military draft law and fears that freed slaves would come North and undermine the labor market. The Emancipation Proclamation gained votes for Republicans in rural New England and the upper Midwest but cost votes in the Irish and German strongholds and in the lower Midwest where many Southerners had lived for generations. 228 In the spring of 1863 Lincoln was sufficiently optimistic about upcoming military campaigns to think the end of the war could be near; the plans included attacks by Hooker on Lee north of Richmond Rosecrans on Chattanooga Grant on Vicksburg and a naval assault on Charleston. 229 Hooker was routed by Lee at the Battle of Chancellorsville in May then resigned and was replaced by George Meade . 230 Meade followed Lee north into Pennsylvania and beat him in the Gettysburg Campaign but then failed to follow up despite Lincolns demands. At the same time Grant captured Vicksburg and gained control of the Mississippi River splitting the far western rebel states. 231 Emancipation Proclamation Main articles: Abraham Lincoln and slavery and Emancipation Proclamation First Reading of the Emancipation Proclamation of President Lincoln by Francis Bicknell Carpenter 1864 clickable imageuse cursor to identify The Federal governments power to end slavery was limited by the Constitution which before 1865 was understood to reserve the issue to the individual states. Lincoln believed that slavery would be rendered obsolete if its expansion into new territories were prevented because these territories would be admitted to the Union as free states and free states would come to outnumber slave states. He sought to persuade the states to agree to compensation for emancipating their slaves. 232 Lincoln rejected Major General John C. Fremont s August 1861 emancipation attempt as well as one by Major General David Hunter in May 1862 on the grounds that it was not within their power and might upset loyal border states enough for them to secede. 233 In June 1862 Congress passed an act banning slavery on all federal territory which Lincoln signed. In July the Confiscation Act of 1862 was enacted providing court procedures to free the slaves of those convicted of aiding the rebellion; Lincoln approved the bill despite his belief that it was unconstitutional. He felt such action could be taken only within the war powers of the commander-in-chief which he planned to exercise. On July 22 1862 Lincoln reviewed a draft of the Emancipation Proclamation with his cabinet. 234 Peace Democrats Copperheads argued that emancipation was a stumbling block to peace and reunification but Republican editor Horace Greeley of the New-York Tribune in his public letter The Prayer of Twenty Millions implored Lincoln to embrace emancipation. 235 236 In a public letter of August 22 1862 Lincoln replied to Greeley writing that while he personally wished all men could be free his first obligation as president was to preserve the Union: 237 My paramount object in this struggle is to save the Union and is not either to save or to destroy slavery. If I could save the Union without freeing any slave I would do it and if I could save it by freeing all the slaves I would do it; and if I could save it by freeing some and leaving others alone I would also do that. What I do about slavery and the colored race I do because I believe it helps to save the Union; and what I forbear I forbear because I do not believe it would help to save the Union ... I have here stated my purpose according to my view of official duty; and I intend no modification of my oft-expressed personal wish that all men everywhere could be free. 238 When Lincoln published his reply to Greeley he had already decided to issue the preliminary Emancipation Proclamation and therefore had already chosen the third option he mentioned in his letter to Greeley: to free some of the slaves namely those in the states in rebellion. Some scholars therefore believe that his reply to Greeley was disingenuous and was intended to reassure white people who would have opposed a war for emancipation that emancipation was merely a means to preserve the Union. 239 On September 22 1862 Lincoln issued the preliminary Emancipation Proclamation 240 which announced that in states still in rebellion on January 1 1863 the slaves would be freed. He spent the next 100 days between September 22 and January 1 preparing the army and the nation for emancipation while Democrats rallied their voters by warning of the threat that freed slaves posed to northern whites. 241 At the same time during those 100 days Lincoln made efforts to end the war with slavery intact suggesting that he still took seriously the first option he mentioned in his letter to Greeley: saving the Union without freeing any slave. 242 But on January 1 1863 keeping his word Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation 243 freeing the slaves in 10 states not then under Union control 244 with exemptions specified for areas under such control. 245 Lincolns comment on signing the Proclamation was: I never in my life felt more certain that I was doing right than I do in signing this paper. 246 With the abolition of slavery in the rebel states now a military objective Union armies advancing south enabled thousands of slaves to escape to freedom . 247 The Emancipation Proclamation having stated that freedmen would be received into the armed service of the United States enlisting these freedmen became official policy. By the spring of 1863 Lincoln was ready to recruit black troops in more than token numbers. In a letter to Tennessee military governor Andrew Johnson encouraging him to lead the way in raising black troops Lincoln wrote The bare sight of fifty thousand armed and drilled black soldiers on the banks of the Mississippi would end the rebellion at once . 248 By the end of 1863 at Lincolns direction General Lorenzo Thomas had enrolled twenty regiments of African Americans from the Mississippi Valley. 248 Gettysburg Address 1863 Main article: Gettysburg Address Lincoln absent his usual top hat and highlighted in red at Gettysburg on November 19 1863. Roughly three hours later he delivered the Gettysburg Address one of the best known speeches in American history . 249 250 Lincoln spoke at the dedication of the Gettysburg battlefield cemetery on November 19 1863. 251 In 272 words and three minutes Lincoln asserted that the nation was born not in 1789 but in 1776 conceived in Liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal . He defined the war as dedicated to the principles of liberty and equality for all. He declared that the deaths of so many brave soldiers would not be in vain that the future of democracy would be assured and that government of the people by the people for the people shall not perish from the earth . 252 Defying his prediction that the world will little note nor long remember what we say here the Address became the most quoted speech in American history. 253 Promoting General Grant The Peacemakers an 1868 painting by George P.A. Healy of events aboard the River Queen in March 1865 clickable imageuse cursor to identify General Ulysses Grants victories at the Battle of Shiloh and in the Vicksburg campaign impressed Lincoln. Responding to criticism of Grant after Shiloh Lincoln had said I cant spare this man. He fights. 254 With Grant in command Lincoln felt the Union Army could advance in multiple theaters while also including black troops. Meades failure to capture Lees army after Gettysburg and the continued passivity of the Army of the Potomac persuaded Lincoln to promote Grant to supreme commander. Grant then assumed command of Meades army. 255 Lincoln was concerned that Grant might be considering a presidential candidacy in 1864. He arranged for an intermediary to inquire into Grants political intentions and once assured that he had none Lincoln promoted Grant to the newly revived rank of Lieutenant General a rank which had been unoccupied since George Washington . 256 Authorization for such a promotion with the advice and consent of the Senate was provided by a new bill which Lincoln signed the same day he submitted Grants name to the Senate. His nomination was confirmed by the Senate on March 2 1864. 257 Grant in 1864 waged the bloody Overland Campaign which exacted heavy losses on both sides. 258 When Lincoln asked what Grants plans were the persistent general replied I propose to fight it out on this line if it takes all summer. 259 Grants army moved steadily south. Lincoln traveled to Grants headquarters at City Point Virginia to confer with Grant and William Tecumseh Sherman. 260 Lincoln reacted to Union losses by mobilizing support throughout the North. 261 Lincoln authorized Grant to target infrastructureplantations railroads and bridgeshoping to weaken the Souths morale and fighting ability. He emphasized defeat of the Confederate armies over destruction which was considerable for its own sake. 262 Lincolns engagement became distinctly personal on one occasion in 1864 when Confederate general Jubal Early raided Washington D.C. Legend has it that while Lincoln watched from an exposed position Union Captain and future Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. shouted at him Get down you damn fool before you get shot! But this story is commonly regarded as apocryphal. 263 264 265 266 As Grant continued to weaken Lees forces efforts to discuss peace began. Confederate Vice President Stephens led a group meeting with Lincoln Seward and others at Hampton Roads . Lincoln refused to negotiate with the Confederacy as a coequal; his objective to end the fighting was not realized. 267 On April 1 1865 Grant nearly encircled Petersburg in a siege. The Confederate government evacuated Richmond and Lincoln visited the conquered capital. On April 9 Lee surrendered to Grant at Appomattox officially ending the war. 268 Reelection Main article: 1864 United States presidential election An electoral landslide for Lincoln in red in the 1864 election; southern states brown and territories gray not in play A poster of the 1864 election campaign with Andrew Johnson as the candidate for vice president Lincoln ran for reelection in 1864 while uniting the main Republican factions along with War Democrats Edwin M. Stanton and Andrew Johnson. Lincoln used conversation and his patronage powersgreatly expanded from peacetimeto build support and fend off the Radicals efforts to replace him. 269 At its convention the Republican Party selected Johnson as his running mate. To broaden his coalition to include War Democrats as well as Republicans Lincoln ran under the label of the new Union Party . 270 Grants bloody stalemates damaged Lincolns re-election prospects and many Republicans feared defeat. Lincoln confidentially pledged in writing that if he should lose the election he would still defeat the Confederacy before turning over the White House; 271 Lincoln did not show the pledge to his cabinet but asked them to sign the sealed envelope. The pledge read as follows: This morning as for some days past it seems exceedingly probable that this Administration will not be re-elected. Then it will be my duty to so co-operate with the President elect as to save the Union between the election and the inauguration; as he will have secured his election on such ground that he cannot possibly save it afterward. 272 The Democratic platform followed the Peace wing of the party and called the war a failure ; but their candidate McClellan supported the war and repudiated the platform. Meanwhile Lincoln emboldened Grant with more troops and Republican party support. Shermans capture of Atlanta in September and David Farragut s capture of Mobile ended defeatism. 273 The Democratic Party was deeply split with some leaders and most soldiers openly for Lincoln. The National Union Party was united by Lincolns support for emancipation. State Republican parties stressed the perfidy of the Copperheads. 274 On November 8 Lincoln carried all but three states including 78 percent of Union soldiers. 275 Lincolns second inaugural address at the almost completed Capitol building March 4 1865 On March 4 1865 Lincoln delivered his second inaugural address . In it he deemed the war casualties to be Gods will. Historian Mark Noll places the speech among the small handful of semi-sacred texts by which Americans conceive their place in the world; it is inscribed in the Lincoln Memorial . 276 Lincoln said: Fondly do we hopefervently do we praythat this mighty scourge of war may speedily pass away. Yet if God wills that it continue until all the wealth piled by the bond-mans two hundred and fifty years of unrequited toil shall be sunk and until every drop of blood drawn with the lash shall be paid by another drawn with the sword as was said three thousand years ago so still it must be said the judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether . With malice toward none; with charity for all; with firmness in the right as God gives us to see the right let us strive on to finish the work we are in; to bind up the nations wounds; to care for him who shall have borne the battle and for his widow and his orphanto do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among ourselves and with all nations. 277 Among those present for this speech was actor John Wilkes Booth who on April 14 1865 just over a month after Lincolns second inauguration assassinated him . Reconstruction Main article: Reconstruction era Reconstruction preceded the wars end as Lincoln and his associates considered the reintegration of the nation and the fates of Confederate leaders and freed slaves. When a general asked Lincoln how the defeated Confederates were to be treated Lincoln replied Let em up easy. 278 Lincoln was determined to find meaning in the war in its aftermath and did not want to continue to outcast the southern states. His main goal was to keep the union together so he proceeded by focusing not on whom to blame but on how to rebuild the nation as one. 279 Lincoln led the moderates in Reconstruction policy and was opposed by the Radicals under Rep. Thaddeus Stevens Sen. Charles Sumner and Sen. Benjamin Wade who otherwise remained Lincolns allies. Determined to reunite the nation and not alienate the South Lincoln urged that speedy elections under generous terms be held. His Amnesty Proclamation of December 8 1863 offered pardons to those who had not held a Confederate civil office and had not mistreated Union prisoners if they were willing to sign an oath of allegiance. 280 A political cartoon of Vice President Andrew Johnson a former tailor and Lincoln 1865 entitled The Rail Splitter At Work Repairing the Union . The caption reads Johnson: Take it quietly Uncle Abe and I will draw it closer than ever. Lincoln: A few more stitches Andy and the good old Union will be mended. As Southern states fell they needed leaders while their administrations were restored. In Tennessee and Arkansas Lincoln respectively appointed Johnson and Frederick Steele as military governors. In Louisiana Lincoln ordered General Nathaniel P. Banks to promote a plan that would reestablish statehood when 10 percent of the voters agreed and only if the reconstructed states abolished slavery. Democratic opponents accused Lincoln of using the military to ensure his and the Republicans political aspirations. The Radicals denounced his policy as too lenient and passed their own plan the 1864 WadeDavis Bill which Lincoln vetoed. The Radicals retaliated by refusing to seat elected representatives from Louisiana Arkansas and Tennessee. 281 Lincolns appointments were designed to harness both moderates and Radicals. To fill Chief Justice Taneys seat on the Supreme Court he named the Radicals choice Salmon P. Chase whom Lincoln believed would uphold his emancipation and paper money policies. 282 After implementing the Emancipation Proclamation Lincoln increased pressure on Congress to outlaw slavery throughout the nation with a constitutional amendment. He declared that such an amendment would clinch the whole subject and by December 1863 an amendment was brought to Congress. 283 The Senate passed it on April 8 1864 but the first vote in the House of Representatives fell short of the required two-thirds majority. Passage became part of Lincolns reelection platform and after his successful reelection the second attempt in the House passed on January 31 1865. 284 With ratification it became the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution on December 6 1865. 285 Lincoln believed the federal government had limited responsibility to the millions of freedmen. He signed Senator Charles Sumners Freedmens Bureau bill that set up a temporary federal agency designed to meet the immediate needs of former slaves. The law opened land for a lease of three years with the ability to purchase title for the freedmen. Lincoln announced a Reconstruction plan that involved short-term military control pending readmission under the control of southern Unionists. 286 Historians agree that it is impossible to predict how Reconstruction would have proceeded had Lincoln lived. Biographers James G. Randall and Richard Current according to David Lincove argue that: 287 It is likely that had he lived Lincoln would have followed a policy similar to Johnsons that he would have clashed with congressional Radicals that he would have produced a better result for the freedmen than occurred and that his political skills would have helped him avoid Johnsons mistakes. Eric Foner argues that: 288 Unlike Sumner and other Radicals Lincoln did not see Reconstruction as an opportunity for a sweeping political and social revolution beyond emancipation. He had long made clear his opposition to the confiscation and redistribution of land. He believed as most Republicans did in April 1865 that voting requirements should be determined by the states. He assumed that political control in the South would pass to white Unionists reluctant secessionists and forward-looking former Confederates. But time and again during the war Lincoln after initial opposition had come to embrace positions first advanced by abolitionists and Radical Republicans. ... Lincoln undoubtedly would have listened carefully to the outcry for further protection for the former slaves. ... It is entirely plausible to imagine Lincoln and Congress agreeing on a Reconstruction policy that encompassed federal protection for basic civil rights plus limited black suffrage along the lines Lincoln proposed just before his death. Native Americans Lincolns relationship with Native Americans started before he was born with their killing of his grandfather in front of his sons including Lincolns father Thomas. 289 Lincoln himself served as a captain in the state militia during the Black Hawk War but saw no combat. 290 Lincoln used appointments to the Indian Bureau as a reward to supporters from Minnesota and Wisconsin . While in office his administration faced difficulties guarding Western settlers railroads and telegraphs from Indian attacks. 291 On August 17 1862 the Dakota War broke out in Minnesota. Hundreds of settlers were killed 30 000 were displaced from their homes and Washington was deeply alarmed. 292 Some feared incorrectly that it might represent a Confederate conspiracy to start a war on the Northwestern frontier. 293 Lincoln ordered thousands of Confederate prisoners of war sent by railroad to put down the uprising. 294 When the Confederates protested forcing Confederate prisoners to fight Indians Lincoln revoked the policy and none arrived in Minnesota. Lincoln sent General John Pope as commander of the new Department of the Northwest two weeks into the hostilities. 295 296 Before he arrived the Fond Du Lac band of Chippewa sent Lincoln a letter asking to go to war for the United States against the Sioux so Lincoln could send Minnesotas troops to fight the South. 297 298 Shortly after a Mille Lacs Band Chief offered the same at St. Cloud Minnesota . 299 300 In it the Chippewa specified they wanted to use the indigenous rules of warfare . 301 That meant there would be no prisoners of war no surrender no peace agreement . 302 Lincoln did not accept the Chippewa offer as he could not control the Chippewa and women and children were considered legitimate casualties in native American warfare. 303 Serving under Gen. Pope was Minnesota Congressman Henry H. Sibley . Minnesotas Governor had made Sibley a Colonel United States Volunteers to command the U.S. force tasked with fighting the war and that eventually defeated Little Crow s forces at the Battle of Wood Lake . 296 The day the Mdewakanton force surrendered at Camp Release a Chippewa war council met at Minnesotas capitol with another Chippewa offer to Lincoln to fight the Sioux. 304 additional citations needed Sibley ordered a military commission to review the actions of the captured to try those that had committed war crimes . The legitimacy of military commissions trying opposing combatants had been established during the Mexican War . 305 Sibley thought he had 16-20 of the men he wanted for trial while Gen. Pope ordered all detained be tried. 303 were given death sentences that were subject to Presidential review. Lincoln ordered Pope send all trial transcripts to Washington where Lincoln and two of his staff examined them. Lincoln realized the trials could be divided into two groups: combat between combatants and combat against civilians. citation needed The groups could be identified by their transcripts the first group all had three pages in length while the second group had more some up to twelve pages. citation needed He placed 263 cases into the first group and commuted their sentences. In the second group were forty cases. One he commuted for becoming a states witness . Sibley dismissed another when proof surfaced exonerating the defendant. The remaining 38 were executed in the largest mass hanging in U.S. history. citation needed Questions arose concerning three executions that have not been answered. 306 Less than 4 months afterwards Lincoln issued the Lieber Code which governed wartime conduct of the Union Army by defining command responsibility for war crimes and crimes against humanity. Congressman Alexander Ramsey told Lincoln in 1864 he would have gotten more re-election support in Minnesota had he executed all 303 of the Mdewakanton. Lincoln responded I could not afford to hang men for votes. 307 The men whose sentences he commuted were sent to a military prison at Davenport Iowa . Some he released due to the efforts of Bishop Henry Whipple . Whig theory of a presidency Lincoln adhered to the Whig theory of a presidency focused on executing laws while deferring to Congress responsibility for legislating. Under this philosophy Lincoln vetoed only four bills during his presidency including the Wade-Davis Bill with its harsh Reconstruction program. 308 The 1862 Homestead Act made millions of acres of Western government-held land available for purchase at low cost. The 1862 Morrill Land-Grant Colleges Act provided government grants for agricultural colleges in each state. The Pacific Railway Acts of 1862 and 1864 granted federal support for the construction of the United States first transcontinental railroad which was completed in 1869. 309 The passage of the Homestead Act and the Pacific Railway Acts was enabled by the absence of Southern congressmen and senators who had opposed the measures in the 1850s. 310 The Lincoln cabinet 311 Office Name Term President Abraham Lincoln 18611865 Vice President Hannibal Hamlin 18611865 Andrew Johnson 1865 Secretary of State William H. Seward 18611865 Secretary of the Treasury Salmon P. Chase 18611864 William P. Fessenden 18641865 Hugh McCulloch 1865 Secretary of War Simon Cameron 18611862 Edwin M. Stanton 18621865 Attorney General Edward Bates 18611864 James Speed 18641865 Postmaster General Montgomery Blair 18611864 William Dennison Jr. 18641865 Secretary of the Navy Gideon Welles 18611865 Secretary of the Interior Caleb Blood Smith 18611862 John Palmer Usher 18631865 In the selection and use of his cabinet Lincoln employed the strengths of his opponents in a manner that emboldened his presidency. Lincoln commented on his thought process We need the strongest men of the party in the Cabinet. We needed to hold our own people together. I had looked the party over and concluded that these were the very strongest men. Then I had no right to deprive the country of their services. 312 Goodwin described the group in her biography as a Team of Rivals . 313 There were two measures passed to raise revenues for the Federal government: tariffs a policy with long precedent and a Federal income tax . In 1861 Lincoln signed the second and third Morrill Tariffs following the first enacted by Buchanan. He also signed the Revenue Act of 1861 creating the first U.S. income taxa flat tax of 3 percent on incomes above 800 equivalent to 27 129 in 2023 314 . 315 The Revenue Act of 1862 adopted rates that increased with income. 316 The Lincoln Administration presided over the expansion of the federal governments economic influence in other areas. The National Banking Act created the system of national banks. The U.S. issued paper currency for the first time known as greenbacks printed in green on the reverse side. 317 In 1862 Congress created the Department of Agriculture . 315 In response to rumors of a renewed draft the editors of the New York World and the Journal of Commerce published a false draft proclamation that created an opportunity for the editors and others to corner the gold market. Lincoln attacked the media for such behavior and ordered a military seizure of the two papers which lasted for two days. 318 Wikisource has original text related to this article: Thanksgiving Proclamation 1863 Lincoln is largely responsible for the Thanksgiving holiday . 319 Thanksgiving had become a regional holiday in New England in the 17th century. It had been sporadically proclaimed by the federal government on irregular dates. The prior proclamation had been during James Madison s presidency 50 years earlier. In 1863 Lincoln declared the final Thursday in November of that year to be a day of Thanksgiving. 319 In June 1864 Lincoln approved the Yosemite Grant enacted by Congress which provided unprecedented federal protection for the area now known as Yosemite National Park . 320 Supreme Court appointments Supreme Court Justices Justice Nominated Appointed Noah Haynes Swayne January 21 1862 January 24 1862 Samuel Freeman Miller July 16 1862 July 16 1862 David Davis December 1 1862 December 8 1862 Stephen Johnson Field March 6 1863 March 10 1863 Salmon Portland Chase Chief Justice December 6 1864 December 6 1864 Lincolns philosophy on court nominations was that we cannot ask a man what he will do and if we should and he should answer us we should despise him for it. Therefore we must take a man whose opinions are known. 319 Lincoln made five appointments to the Supreme Court. Noah Haynes Swayne was an anti-slavery lawyer who was committed to the Union. Samuel Freeman Miller supported Lincoln in the 1860 election and was an avowed abolitionist. David Davis was Lincolns campaign manager in 1860 and had served as a judge in the Illinois court circuit where Lincoln practiced. Democrat Stephen Johnson Field a previous California Supreme Court justice provided geographic and political balance. Finally Lincolns Treasury Secretary Salmon P. Chase became Chief Justice. Lincoln believed Chase was an able jurist would support Reconstruction legislation and that his appointment united the Republican Party. 321 Foreign policy Main articles: Presidency of Abraham Lincoln Foreign policy and Diplomacy of the American Civil War Lincoln named his main political rival William H. Seward as Secretary of State and left most diplomatic issues in Sewards portfolio. However Lincoln did select some top diplomats as part of his patronage policy. 322 He also closely watched the handling of the Trent Affair in late 1861 to make sure the situation did not escalate into war with Britain. 323 Sewards main role was to keep Britain and France from supporting the Confederacy. He was successful after indicating to Britain and France that the Union would declare war on them if they supported the South. 324 Assassination Main article: Assassination of Abraham Lincoln Shown in the presidential booth of Fords Theatre from left to right are assassin John Wilkes Booth Abraham Lincoln Mary Todd Lincoln Clara Harris and Henry Rathbone . John Wilkes Booth was a well-known actor and a Confederate spy from Maryland; though he never joined the Confederate army he had contacts with the Confederate secret service. 325 After attending Lincolns last public address on April 11 1865 in which Lincoln stated his preference that the franchise be conferred on some black men specifically on the very intelligent and on those who serve our cause as soldiers 326 Booth hatched a plot to assassinate the President. 327 When Booth learned of the Lincolns intent to attend a play with General Grant he planned to assassinate Lincoln and Grant at Fords Theatre . Booth had attended a dress rehearsal the day before to better rehearse his scheme for shooting Lincoln ... and then escaping. 328 Lincoln and his wife attended the play Our American Cousin on the evening of April 14 just five days after the Union victory at the Battle of Appomattox Courthouse . At the last minute Grant decided to go to New Jersey to visit his children instead of attending the play. 329 At 10:15 in the evening Booth entered the back of Lincolns theater box crept up from behind and fired at the back of Lincolns head mortally wounding him. Lincolns guest Major Henry Rathbone momentarily grappled with Booth but Booth stabbed him and escaped. 330 After being attended by Doctor Charles Leale and two other doctors Lincoln was taken across the street to Petersen House . After remaining in a coma for nine hours Lincoln died at 7:22 in the morning on April 15. 331 k Stanton saluted and said Now he belongs to the ages. 336 l Lincolns body was placed in a flag-wrapped coffin which was loaded into a hearse and escorted to the White House by Union soldiers. 337 President Johnson was sworn in later that same day. 338 Two weeks later Booth refusing to surrender was tracked to a farm in Virginia. He was mortally shot by Sergeant Boston Corbett and died on April 26. Secretary of War Stanton had issued orders that Booth be taken alive so Corbett was initially arrested to be court martialed. After a brief interview Stanton declared him a patriot and dismissed the charge. 339 Funeral and burial Main article: State funeral of Abraham Lincoln The late President lay in state first in the East Room of the White House and then in the Capitol Rotunda from April 19 to 21. The caskets containing Lincolns body and the body of his son Willie traveled for three weeks on the Lincoln Special funeral train . 340 The train followed a circuitous route from Washington D.C. to Springfield Illinois stopping at many cities for memorials attended by hundreds of thousands. Many others gathered along the tracks as the train passed with bands bonfires and hymn singing 341 or in silent grief. Poet Walt Whitman composed When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloomd to eulogize him one of four poems he wrote about Lincoln . 342 African Americans were especially moved; they had lost their Moses . 343 In a larger sense the reaction was in response to the deaths of so many men in the war. 344 Historians emphasized the widespread shock and sorrow but noted that some Lincoln haters celebrated his death. 345 Lincolns body was buried at Oak Ridge Cemetery in Springfield and now lies within the Lincoln Tomb . 346 Religious and philosophical beliefs Further information: Religious views of Abraham Lincoln Part of the Politics series Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civil society Civic virtue Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Modern Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Federal parliamentary Imperial Islamic Parliamentary Peoples Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams Gerry Adams John Ataturk Azana Bartley Benn Tony Bennett Black Bolivar Burgon Campbell Chapman Clark Katy Clarke Tom Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Paul Flynn Stephen Galloway Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Greer Grevy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hebert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones Elin Jones Lynne Juarez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid McKechin Mullin Naysmith Mannin McDonnell Nandy Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic c. 375 BC De re publica 5451 BC Discourses on Livy 1531 The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates 1649 The Commonwealth of Oceana 1656 Discourses Concerning Government 1698 The Spirit of Law 1748 Discourse on Inequality 1755 The Social Contract 1762 The Federalist Papers 17871788 Rights of Man 1791 Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch 1794 Democracy in America 18351840 On Revolution 1963 History Roman Republic Ganasangha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 19181919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup detat attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup detat 1970 Cambodian coup detat Metapolitefsi Iranian Revolution 1987 Fijian coups detat Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperors New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e Abraham Lincoln painting by George Peter Alexander Healy in 1869 Lincoln in February 1865 two months before his death As a young man Lincoln was a religious skeptic . 347 He was deeply familiar with the Bible quoting and praising it. 348 He was private about his position on organized religion and respected the beliefs of others. 349 He never made a clear profession of Christian beliefs. 350 Throughout his public career Lincoln often quoted Scripture. 351 His three most famous speeches the House Divided Speech the Gettysburg Address and his second inaugural all contain direct allusions to Providence and quote from Scripture. In the 1840s Lincoln subscribed to the Doctrine of Necessity a belief that the human mind was controlled by a higher power. 352 With the death of his son Edward in 1850 he more frequently expressed a dependence on God. 353 He never joined a church although he frequently attended First Presbyterian Church with his wife beginning in 1852. 354 m In the 1850s Lincoln asserted his belief in providence in a general way and rarely used the language or imagery of the evangelicals; instead he regarded the republicanism of the Founding Fathers with an almost religious reverence. 355 The death of his son Willie in February 1862 may have caused him to look toward religion for solace. 356 After Willies death he questioned the divine necessity of the wars severity. He wrote at this time that God could have either saved or destroyed the Union without a human contest. Yet the contest began. And having begun He could give the final victory to either side any day. Yet the contest proceeds. 357 Lincoln did believe in an all-powerful God that shaped events and by 1865 was expressing that belief in major speeches. 350 By the end of the war he increasingly appealed to the Almighty for solace and to explain events writing on April 4 1864 to a newspaper editor in Kentucky: I claim not to have controlled events but confess plainly that events have controlled me. Now at the end of three years struggle the nations condition is not what either party or any man devised or expected. God alone can claim it. Whither it is tending seems plain. If God now wills the removal of a great wrong and wills also that we of the North as well as you of the South shall pay fairly for our complicity in that wrong impartial history will find therein new cause to attest and revere the justice and goodness of God. 358 This spirituality can best be seen in his second inaugural address considered by some scholars 359 as the greatest such address in American history and by Lincoln himself as his own greatest speech or one of them at the very least. n 360 Lincoln explains therein that the cause purpose and result of the war was Gods will. 361 Lincolns frequent use of religious imagery and language toward the end of his life may have reflected his own personal beliefs or might have been a device to reach his audiences who were mostly evangelical Protestants . 362 On the day Lincoln was assassinated he reportedly told his wife he desired to visit the Holy Land . 363 Health Main article: Health of Abraham Lincoln Lincoln is believed to have had depression smallpox and malaria . 364 He took blue mass pills which contained mercury 365 to treat constipation . 366 It is unknown to what extent this may have resulted in mercury poisoning . 367 Several claims have been made that Lincolns health was declining before the assassination. These are often based on photographs of Lincoln appearing to show weight loss and muscle wasting. 368 It is also suspected that he might have had a rare genetic disease such as Marfan syndrome or multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2B . 368 Legacy See also: Cultural depictions of Abraham Lincoln Republican values Lincolns redefinition of republican values has been stressed by historians such as John Patrick Diggins Harry V. Jaffa Vernon Burton Eric Foner and Herman J. Belz. 369 Lincoln called the Declaration of Independence which emphasized freedom and equality for allthe sheet anchor of republicanism beginning in the 1850s. He did this at a time when the Constitution which tolerated slavery was the focus of most political discourse. 370 Diggins notes Lincoln presented Americans a theory of history that offers a profound contribution to the theory and destiny of republicanism itself in the 1860 Cooper Union speech. 371 Instead of focusing on the legality of an argument he focused on the moral basis of republicanism. 372 His position on war was founded on a legal argument regarding the Constitution as essentially a contract among the states and all parties must agree to pull out of the contract. Furthermore it was a national duty to ensure the republic stands in every state. 373 Many soldiers and religious leaders from the north though felt the fight for liberty and freedom of slaves was ordained by their moral and religious beliefs. 374 As a Whig activist Lincoln was a spokesman for business interests favoring high tariffs banks infrastructure improvements and railroads in opposition to Jacksonian democrats . 375 Lincoln shared the sympathies that the Jacksonians professed for the common man but he disagreed with the Jacksonian view that the government should be divorced from economic enterprise . 376 Nevertheless Lincoln admired Andrew Jackson s steeliness as well as his patriotism. 377 According to historian Sean Wilentz : 377 Just as the Republican Party of the 1850s absorbed certain elements of Jacksonianism so Lincoln whose Whiggery had always been more egalitarian than that of other Whigs found himself absorbing some of them as well. And some of the Jacksonian spirit resided inside the Lincoln White House. William C. Harris found that Lincolns reverence for the Founding Fathers the Constitution the laws under it and the preservation of the Republic and its institutions strengthened his conservatism. 378 James G. Randall emphasizes his tolerance and moderation in his preference for orderly progress his distrust of dangerous agitation and his reluctance toward ill digested schemes of reform. Randall concludes that he was conservative in his complete avoidance of that type of so-called radicalism which involved abuse of the South hatred for the slaveholder thirst for vengeance partisan plotting and ungenerous demands that Southern institutions be transformed overnight by outsiders. 379 Reunification of the states Bureau of Engraving and Printing portrait of Lincoln as president In Lincolns first inaugural address he explored the nature of democracy. He denounced secession as anarchy and he explained that majority rule had to be balanced by constitutional restraints. He said A majority held in restraint by constitutional checks and limitations and always changing easily with deliberate changes of popular opinions and sentiments is the only true sovereign of a free people. 380 The successful reunification of the states had consequences for how people viewed the country. The term the United States has historically been used sometimes in the plural these United States and other times in the singular. The Civil War was a significant force in the eventual dominance of the singular usage by the end of the 19th century. 381 Historical reputation In his company I was never reminded of my humble origin or of my unpopular color. 382 Frederick Douglass In surveys of U.S. scholars ranking presidents conducted since 1948 the top three presidents are generally Lincoln Washington and Franklin Delano Roosevelt although the order varies. 383 o Between 1999 and 2011 Lincoln John F. Kennedy and Ronald Reagan were the top-ranked presidents in eight public opinion surveys according to Gallup. 385 A 2004 study found that scholars in the fields of history and politics ranked Lincoln number one while legal scholars placed him second after George Washington. 386 Lincolns assassination left him a national martyr. He was viewed by abolitionists as a champion of human liberty. Republicans linked Lincolns name to their party. Many though not all in the South considered Lincoln as a man of outstanding ability. 387 Historians have said he was a classical liberal in the 19th-century sense. Allen C. Guelzo states that Lincoln was a classical liberal democratan enemy of artificial hierarchy a friend to trade and business as ennobling and enabling and an American counterpart to Mill Cobden and Bright whose portrait Lincoln hung in his White House office. 388 389 Sociologist Barry Schwartz argues that Lincolns American reputation grew slowly from the late 19th century until the Progressive Era 19001920s when he emerged as one of Americas most venerated heroes even among white Southerners. The high point came in 1922 with the dedication of the Lincoln Memorial on the National Mall in Washington D.C. 390 Union nationalism as envisioned by Lincoln helped lead America to the nationalism of Theodore Roosevelt Woodrow Wilson and Franklin Delano Roosevelt . 391 In the New Deal era liberals honored Lincoln not so much as the self-made man or the great war president but as the advocate of the common man who they claimed would have supported the welfare state . 392 Schwartz argues that in the 1930s and 1940s the memory of Abraham Lincoln was practically sacred and provided the nation with a moral symbol inspiring and guiding American life. During the Great Depression he argues Lincoln served as a means for seeing the worlds disappointments for making its sufferings not so much explicable as meaningful. Franklin D. Roosevelt preparing America for war used the words of the Civil War president to clarify the threat posed by Germany and Japan. Americans asked What would Lincoln do? 393 However Schwartz also finds that since World War II Lincolns symbolic power has lost relevance and this fading hero is symptomatic of fading confidence in national greatness. He suggested that postmodernism and multiculturalism have diluted greatness as a concept. 394 In the Cold War years Lincolns image shifted to a symbol of freedom who brought hope to those oppressed by Communist regimes . 392 He had long been known as the Great Emancipator 395 but by the late 1960s some African American intellectuals led by Lerone Bennett Jr. denied that Lincoln deserved that title. 396 397 Bennett won wide attention when he called Lincoln a white supremacist in 1968. 398 He noted that Lincoln used ethnic slurs and told jokes that ridiculed blacks. Bennett argued that Lincoln opposed social equality and proposed that freed slaves voluntarily move to another country. The emphasis shifted away from Lincoln the emancipator to an argument that blacks had freed themselves from slavery or at least were responsible for pressuring the government to emancipate them. 399 Defenders of Lincoln retorted that he was a moral visionary who deftly advanced the abolitionist cause as fast as politically possible. 400 Brian Dirck stated that few Civil War scholars take Bennett or Thomas DiLorenzo 401 seriously pointing to their narrow political agendas and faulty research . 402 By the 1970s Lincoln had become a hero to political conservatives 403 apart from neo-Confederates such as Mel Bradford who denounced his treatment of the white Southfor his intense nationalism his support for business his insistence on stopping the spread of slavery his acting on Lockean and Burkean principles on behalf of both liberty and tradition and his devotion to the principles of the Founding Fathers. 404 Lincoln became a favorite of liberal intellectuals across the world. 405 Barry Schwartz wrote in 2009 that Lincolns image suffered erosion fading prestige benign ridicule in the late 20th century. 406 On the other hand Donald opined in his 1996 biography that Lincoln was distinctly endowed with the personality trait of negative capability defined by the poet John Keats and attributed to extraordinary leaders who were content in the midst of uncertainties and doubts and not compelled toward fact or reason . 407 In the 21st century President Barack Obama named Lincoln his favorite president and insisted on using the Lincoln Bible for his inaugural ceremonies. 408 409 410 Lincoln has often been portrayed by Hollywood almost always in a flattering light. 411 412 Lincoln has also been admired by political figures outside the U.S. including German political theorist Karl Marx 413 Indian independence leader Mahatma Gandhi 414 former Liberian president Ellen Johnson Sirleaf 415 leader of the Italian Risorgimento Giuseppe Garibaldi 416 and Libyan revolutionary Muammar Gaddafi . 417 Memory and memorials Main article: Memorials to Abraham Lincoln Lincolns portrait appears on two denominations of United States currency the penny and the 5 bill . He appears on postage stamps across the world. 418 419 While he is usually portrayed bearded he did not grow a beard until 1860 at the suggestion of 11-year-old Grace Bedell . He was the first of five presidents to do so. 420 He has been memorialized in many town city and county names 421 including the capital of Nebraska. 422 The United States Navy Nimitz -class aircraft carrier USS Abraham Lincoln CVN-72 is named after Lincoln the second Navy ship to bear his name. 423 The Lincoln Memorial is one of the most visited monuments in the nations capital 424 and is one of the most visited National Park Service sites in the country. 425 Fords Theatre among the most visited sites in Washington D.C. 425 is across the street from Petersen House where Lincoln died. 426 Memorials in Springfield Illinois include the Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum Lincolns home and his tomb . 427 A portrait carving of Lincoln appears with those of three other presidents on Mount Rushmore which receives about 3 million visitors a year. 428 An influential statue of Lincoln stands in Lincoln Park Chicago with recastings given as diplomatic gifts standing in Parliament Square London and Parque Lincoln Mexico City. 429 430 431 In 2019 Congress officially dedicated room H-226 in the United States Capitol to Abraham Lincoln. 432 The room is located off National Statuary Hall and served as the post office of the House while then-Representative Abraham Lincoln served in Congress from 1847 to 1849. 433 434 Lincolns image carved into the stone of Mount Rushmore Abraham Lincoln a 1909 bronze statue by Adolph Weinman sits before a historic church in Hodgenville Kentucky. The Lincoln memorial postage stamp of 1866 was issued by the U.S. Post Office exactly one year after Lincolns assassination. Lincoln Memorial in Washington D.C. The Lincoln cent an American coin portraying Lincoln See also Biography portal American Civil War portal United States portal Lincoln film from 2012 by Steven Spielberg Linconia a proposed colony in Central America named for Lincoln List of civil rights leaders Outline of Abraham Lincoln The Towers Ohio State - Lincoln Tower Notes a b Discharged from command-rank of Captain and re-enlisted at rank of Private. The identity of Lincolns grandmother Bathsheba Herring though without certainty is the consensus of multiple Lincoln biographers. She was the daughter of Alexander and Abigail Herring nee Harrison. 4 Thomas born January 1778 would have been 8 at the attack May 1786. Older sources use six. 7 Their land eventually became part of Space when the county was established in 1818. 17 Historians disagree on who initiated the move; Thomas Lincoln had no obvious reason to do so. One possibility is that other members of the family including Dennis Hanks may not have matched Thomass stability and steady income. 41 The Lincolns last descendant great-grandson Robert Todd Lincoln Beckwith died in 1985. 58 Lincoln was a descendant of the Harrisons through his grandmother Bathsheba Herring. 107 Eric Foner contrasts the abolitionists and anti-slavery Radical Republicans of the Northeast who saw slavery as a sin with the conservative Republicans who thought it was bad because it hurt white people and blocked progress. Foner argues that Lincoln was in the middle opposing slavery primarily because it violated the republicanism principles of the Founding Fathers especially the equality of all men and democratic self-government as expressed in the Declaration of Independence . 127 Although the name of the Supreme Court case is Dred Scott v. Sandford the respondents surname was actually Sanford . A clerk misspelled the name and the court never corrected the error. 128 Major Northern newspapers however demanded morethey expected victory within 90 days. 212 At the moment of death some observers said his face seemed to relax into a smile. 332 333 334 335 Other versions of the quotation have been offered including He now belongs to the ages He is a man for the ages and Now he belongs to the angels. Gopnik Adam Angels and Ages: Lincolns language and its legacy The New Yorker May 21 2007. On claims that Lincoln was baptized by an associate of Alexander Campbell see Martin Jim 1996. The secret baptism of Abraham Lincoln . Restoration Quarterly . 38 2. Archived from the original on October 19 2012 . Retrieved May 27 2012 . Lincoln wrote to Thurlow Weed on March 4 1865 on the recent Inaugeral sic Address. I expect the latter to wear as well asperhaps better thanany thing I have produced.... While the book Rating The Presidents: A Ranking of U.S. Leaders From the Great and Honorable to the Dishonest and Incompetent acknowledges that polls have rated Lincoln among the top presidents since 1948 the authors find him to be among the two best presidents along with Franklin Delano Roosevelt. 384 References Carpenter Francis B. 1866. Six Months in the White House: The Story of a Picture . Hurd and Houghton. p. 217 . Donald 1996 pp. 2022. Warren 2017 pp. 34. Harrison 1935 p. 276. Warren 2017 p. 4. a b Donald 1996 p. 21. Wilson et al. 1998 pp. 3536. Bartelt 2008 p. 79. Warren 2017 p. 9. Warren 2017 pp. 910. Donald 1996 pp. 2224. Warren 2017 p. 13. Warren 2017 p. 26. Warren 2017 pp. 16 43. Burlingame Michael Abraham Lincoln: A Life vol. 1 p. 22 The Underground Railroad in Indiana National Geographic Bartelt 2008 pp. 3 5 16. Donald 1996 pp. 2324. Lincoln Abraham March 8 2001. Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln. Volume 4 . pp. 6162. Bartelt 2008 pp. 34 156. Donald 1996 p. 24. Bartelt 2008 pp. 24 104. Bartelt 2008 pp. 2223 77. Donald 1996 pp. 34 116. Bartelt 2008 pp. 23 83. Donald 1996 pp. 2627. Blumenthal Sidney A Self-Made Man: The Political Life of Abraham Lincoln 1809-1849 . New York: Simon Schuster 2016 p. 29. Bartelt 2008 p. 66. White 2009 p. 30. Bartelt 2008 pp. 10 33. Donald 1996 p. 23. Donald 1996 p. 29. Madison 2014 p. 110. Donald 1996 pp. 2931 3843. Columbia University Libraries Online Exhibitions Jewels in Her Crown: Treasures of Columbia University Libraries Special Collections . exhibitions.library.columbia.edu . Retrieved August 7 2023 . Donald 1996 p. 32. Warren 2017 pp. 134135. Dellinger Bob. Wrestling in the USA . National Wrestling Hall of Fame . Retrieved April 9 2021 . Donald 1996 pp. 4041. a b Donald 1996 p. 36. Bartelt 2008 pp. 3840. Bartelt 2008 p. 71. Oates 1974 pp. 1517. Thomas 2008 pp. 2353. Sandburg 1926 p. 202; Donald 1996 p. 38. Gannett Lewis Winter 2005. Overwhelming Evidence of a Lincoln-Ann Rutledge Romance?: Reexamining Rutledge Family Reminiscences . Journal of the Abraham Lincoln Association . Springfield IL: The Abraham Lincoln Association. pp. 2841. Archived from the original on April 3 2017. Donald 1996 pp. 5558. a b Shenk Joshua Wolf October 2005. Lincolns Great Depression . The Atlantic . The Atlantic Monthly Group. Archived from the original on October 9 2011 . Retrieved October 8 2009 . Siegel Robert October 26 2005. Exploring Abraham Lincolns Melancholy . Retrieved February 17 2023 . Thomas 2008 pp. 5657 6970. Donald 1996 p. 67. Donald 1996 pp. 8086. Lamb Swain 2008 p. 3. Sandburg 1926 pp. 260 290291. Donald 1996 p. 93. Baker 1989 p. 142. White 2009 pp. 179181 476. Emerson Jason 2012. Giant in the Shadows: The Life of Robert T. Lincoln . SIU Press. p. 420. ISBN 978-0-8093-3055-3 . Retrieved June 27 2015 . White 2009 p. 126. Baker 1989 p. 120. Hertz Emanuel 1938. The Hidden Lincoln . The Viking Press. p. 105. Steers 2010 p. 341. Winkle 2001 pp. 8695. Blazeski Goran October 15 2016. Abraham Lincoln was the only President who was also a licensed bartender . The Vintage News . Retrieved March 4 2022 . Lincoln Abraham 1832. The Improvement of Sangamon River . In Miller Marion Mills ed.. Life and Works of Abraham Lincoln Volume 3 . Wildside Press. ISBN 978-1-4344-2497-6 . WP article Winkle 2001 pp. 114116. a b Stone Zofia 2016. Abraham Lincoln: A Biography . Alpha Editions. p. 16. ISBN 978-9-3863-6727-3 via Google Books . Donald 1996 pp. 5355. White 2009 p. 59. Simon 1990 p. 283. Weik Jesse William. Abraham Lincoln and Internal Improvements . Abraham Lincolns Classroom . Archived from the original on February 12 2015 . Retrieved February 12 2015 . Simon 1990 p. 130. Donald 1996 p. 134. Foner 2010 p. 1719 67. Donald 1996 p. 64. Abraham Lincoln . Attorney Registration and Disciplinary Commission ARDC the Supreme Court of Illinois . Archived from the original on July 2 2023 . Retrieved July 2 2023 . White 2009 pp. 71 79 108. Donald 1996 p. 17. Lincoln Abraham November 18 2001. Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln. Volume 1 . p. 109. POW FORUM . Gill Zann 2023. ALTON campaign to end free speech: Two murders that provoked Lincoln to run for President . Berkeley CA: MetaVu Books. ISBN 979-8-9852417-0-9 . Donald 1996 p. 222. Boritt Pinsker 2002 pp. 137153. Oates 1974 p. 79. US Congressman Lincoln Abraham Lincoln Historical Society . Abraham-lincoln-history.org. Archived from the original on December 15 2018 . Retrieved February 2 2019 . Harris 2007 p. 54; Foner 2010 p. 57. LINCOLN Abraham US House of Representatives: History Art Archives . history.house.gov . Retrieved July 1 2022 . Heidler Heidler 2006 pp. 181183. Holzer 2004 p. 63. Oates 1974 pp. 7980. Graebner 1959 pp. 199202. Lincolns Spot Resolutions . National Archives. Archived from the original on September 20 2011 . Retrieved March 12 2009 . Donald 1996 p. 128. Donald 1996 pp. 124126. Donald 1996 p. 140. Arnold Isaac Newton 1885. The Life of Abraham Lincoln . Vol. 2. Chicago IL: Janses McClurg Company. p. 81. Harris 2007 pp. 5557. Donald 1996 p. 96. Donald 1996 pp. 105106 158. Donald 1996 pp. 142143. McGinty Brian February 9 2015. Lincolns Greatest Case: The River the Bridge and the Making of America . W. W. Norton Company. ISBN 978-0-87140-785-6 . Abraham Lincolns Patent Model: Improvement for Buoying Vessels Over Shoals . Smithsonian Institution. Archived from the original on August 25 2017 . Retrieved April 28 2017 . Richards 2015 p. 440. Donald 1996 pp. 155156 196197. Library Philosophical November 9 2010. The Wisdom of Abraham Lincoln . Open Road Media. ISBN 978-1-4532-0281-4 . a b c Donald 1996 pp. 150151. Harrison 1935 pp. 280286 350351. Harrison 1935 . Mitgang Herbert February 10 1989. THE LAW; Lincoln as Lawyer: Transcript Tells Murder Story . The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved November 13 2022 . White 2009 pp. 175176. White 2009 pp. 182185. White 2009 pp. 188190. Thomas 2008 pp. 148152. Graebner 1959 p. 255. a b White 2009 pp. 203205. White 2009 pp. 215216. McGovern 2009 pp. 3839. White 2009 pp. 203204. White 2009 pp. 191194. Notice that Abraham Lincoln declines to serve in the General Assembly 1854 . Office of the Illinois Secretary of State . Oates Stephen 1977. With Malice Toward None: A Biography of Abraham Lincoln . pp. 118120. Oates 1974 p. 119. White 2009 pp. 205208. White 2009 pp. 216221. White 2009 pp. 224228. White 2009 pp. 229230. Foner 2010 pp. 8488. Vishneski John 1988. What the Court Decided in Dred Scott v. Sandford . The American Journal of Legal History . 32 4. Temple University: 373390. doi : 10.2307845743 . ISSN 0002-9319 . JSTOR 845743 . White 2009 pp. 236238. Zarefsky 1993 pp. 69110. Jaffa 2000 pp. 299300. a b White 2009 pp. 247248. Oates 1974 pp. 138139. White 2009 pp. 247250. White 2009 p. 251. Harris 2007 p. 98. Donald 1996 p. 209. White 2009 pp. 257258. Donald 1996 pp. 214218. Donald 1996 pp. 202 219 232. Donald 1996 pp. 214224. Donald 1996 p. 223. Carwardine 2003 pp. 8990. Donald 1996 pp. 242 412. White 2009 pp. 291293. White 2009 pp. 307308. Donald 1996 p. 200. Morse 1893 p. 112. Jaffa 2000 p. 473. Holzer 2004 pp. 108111. Carwardine 2003 p. 97; Holzer 2004 p. 157. Donald 1996 p. 240. Donald 1996 p. 241. Donald 1996 p. 244. Oates 1974 pp. 175176. Donald 1996 p. 245. Lincoln Abraham December 20 1859. Herewith is a little sketch as you requested . Letter to Jesse W. Fell. Archived from the original on November 7 2017 . Retrieved November 6 2017 . Martinez J. Michael 2011. Coming for to Carry Me Home: Race in America from Abolitionism to Jim Crow . Rowman Littlefield Publishers. p. 59. ISBN 978-1-4422-1500-9 . Luthin 1944 pp. 609629. Hofstadter 1938 pp. 5055. Donald 1996 pp. 247250. Boritt Pinsker 2002 pp. 10 13 18. Donald 1996 p. 253. Chadwick Bruce 2009. Lincoln for President: An Unlikely Candidate An Audacious Strategy and the Victory No One Saw Coming . Naperville Illinois: Sourcebooks. pp. 147149. ISBN 978-1-4022-4756-9 . Retrieved April 1 2017 . Murrin John 2006. Liberty Equality Power: A History of the American People . Belmont: Clark Baxter. p. 464. ISBN 978-0-495-91588-1 Donald 1996 pp. 254256. Donald 1996 p. 254. Donald 1996 pp. 251252. Mansch 2005 p. 61. Donald 1996 p. 256. White 2009 p. 350. Nevins 1947 p. 4:312. Affairs of the Nation The Change of Administration To-Day . The New York Times . March 4 1861. p. 1. Edgar 1998 p. 350. Donald 1996 p. 267; Potter 1977 . Donald 1996 p. 267. White 2009 p. 362. Potter 1977 pp. 520 569570. White 2009 p. 369. White 2009 pp. 360361. Donald 1996 p. 268. Vorenberg 2001 p. 22; Vile 2003 pp. 280281. Inaugural Addresses of the Presidents of the United States : from George Washington 1789 to George Bush 1989 . avalon.law.yale.edu . Lupton 2006 p. 34. Broadside President Lincolns Farewell Address to His Old Neighbors Springfield February 12 1861 The Henry Ford . www.thehenryford.org . Retrieved December 5 2020 . Lincolns Farewell Address Illinois History Lincoln Collections . January 27 2018 . Retrieved December 5 2020 . Donald 1996 pp. 273277. Abraham Lincoln arrives in Washington D.C. February 23 1861 . Donald 1996 pp. 277279. Lincoln Abraham March 8 2001. Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln. Volume 4 . p. 333. Sandburg 2002 p. 212. Donald 1996 pp. 283284. Donald 1996 pp. 268 279. Nevins 1959 p. 5:29. Sherman 1990 pp. 185186. Donald 1996 p. 293. Oates 1974 p. 226. Heidler Heidler Coles 2002 p. 174. One significant point of disagreement among historians and political scientists is whether Roger Taney heard Ex parte Merryman as a U.S. circuit judge or as a Supreme Court justice in chambers. White Jonathan W. Abraham Lincoln and Treason in the Civil War: The Trials of John Merryman Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press 2011 pp. 3839. Harris 2011 pp. 5971. Neely 1992 pp. 331. Donald 1996 pp. 303304; Carwardine 2003 pp. 163164. Donald 1996 pp. 315339 417. Donald 1996 p. 314; Carwardine 2003 p. 178. Donald 1996 pp. 314317. Carwardine 2003 p. 181. Boritt Pinsker 2002 pp. 213214. Donald 1996 p. 322. Randall James Garfield 1946. Lincoln the President: Springfield to Gettysburg . p. 50. ISBN 978-0-306-80754-1 . quoted in Peraino Kevin 2013 Lincoln in the World: The Making of a Statesman and the Dawn of American Power . pp. 16061. ISBN 978-0-307-88720-7 Oates 1974 p. 115. Thomas Benjamin Platt; Hyman Harold Melvin 1962. Stanton: The Life and Times of Lincolns Secretary of War . Alfred A. Knopf. pp. 71 87 22930 385 quote. Donald 1996 pp. 295296. Donald 1996 pp. 391392. Ambrose 1996 pp. 7 66 159. Donald 1996 pp. 432436. The President at West Point . The New York Times . New York. June 26 1862. p. 8. Archived from the original on October 8 2024 . Retrieved October 8 2024 via Newspapers.com . the President and Gen. Scott spent several hours in discussing the state of military affairs the doings and misdoings of certain Generals the desirability of continuing the existing Departmental divisions the necessity of further enlistments the prospect of the armies of the Potomac and of the Virginia valleys . . . . The President at West Point . Brooklyn Evening Star . New York. Copy from N.Y. Express. June 25 1862. p. 3. Archived from the original on October 8 2024 . Retrieved October 8 2024 via Newspapers.com . they were in earnest conversation for five hours. Donald 1996 pp. 318319. Donald 1996 pp. 349352. Henry W. Halleck . American Battlefield Trust . June 15 2011. Archived from the original on October 8 2018 . Retrieved October 7 2018 . Nevins 1947 pp. 159162. Nevins 1959 pp. 159162. Goodwin 2005 pp. 478479. Goodwin 2005 pp. 478480. Goodwin 2005 p. 481. Donald 1996 pp. 389390. Nevins 1947 pp. 433444; Donald 1996 pp. 429431. Nevins 1947 p. 322. Donald 1996 pp. 422423. Nevins 1947 pp. 432450. Donald 1996 pp. 444447. Mackubin Thomas Owens March 25 2004. The Liberator . National Review . Archived from the original on February 16 2012 . Retrieved December 12 2008 . Guelzo 1999 pp. 290291. Donald 1996 pp. 364365. McPherson 1992 p. 124. Lundberg James M. 2019. Horace Greeley: Print Politics and the Failure of American Nationhood Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press p. 116. Guelzo 2004 pp. 147153. Graebner 1959 p. 388. Cohen Henry. Was Lincoln Disingenuous in His Greeley Letter? The Lincoln Forum Bulletin Issue 54 Fall 2023. The Preliminary Emancipation Proclamation 1862 . www.archives.gov . Louis P. Masur 2012. Lincolns Hundred Days: The Emancipation Proclamation and the War for the Union. Harvard University Press. Review Freehling William W. 2001. The South vs. the South : How Anti-Confederate Southerners Shaped the Course of the Civil War . Oxford University Press. p. 111. ISBN 978-0-19-802990-8 . Retrieved June 5 2024 . Transcript of the Proclamation . National Archives . October 6 2015. Andrew Johnson and Emancipation in Tennessee Andrew Johnson National Historic Site U.S. National Park Service . www.nps.gov . Donald 1996 p. 379. Donald 1996 p. 407. McPherson James M. March 1995. Who Freed the Slaves? . Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society . 139 1: 9. ISSN 0003-049X . JSTOR 986716 . Retrieved June 5 2024 . a b Donald 1996 p. 431. Conant Sean 2015. The Gettysburg Address: Perspectives on Lincolns Greatest Speech . New York: Oxford University Press. p. ix. ISBN 978-0-19-022745-6 . Holsinger M. Paul 1999. War and American Popular Culture: A Historical Encyclopedia . Westport CT: Greenwood Press. p. 102. ISBN 978-0-313-29908-7 . Donald 1996 pp. 453460. Donald 1996 pp. 460466; Wills 2012 pp. 20 27 105 146. Bulla Borchard 2010 p. 222. Thomas 2008 p. 315. Nevins 1947 pp. 4:617. Donald 1996 pp. 490492. Message of President Abraham Lincoln Nominating Ulysses S. Grant to Be Lieutenant General of the Army . National Archives . August 15 2016. McPherson 2009 p. 113. Donald 1996 p. 501. The Peacemakers . The White House Historical Association. Archived from the original on September 27 2011 . Retrieved May 3 2009 . Thomas 2008 pp. 422424. Neely 2004 pp. 434458. James M. McPherson Battle Cry of Freedom . New York 1988 757. James G. Randall and Richard N. Current Lincoln the President: Last Full Measure New York 1955 200. Thomas 2008 p. 434. G. Edward White Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes: Law and the Inner Self . New York 1993 6465. Donald 1996 p. 565. Donald 1996 p. 589. Fish 1902 pp. 5369; Tegeder 1948 pp. 7790. Donald 1996 pp. 494507. Grimsley Simpson 2001 p. 80. Lincoln Abraham 2001 1953. Memorandum Concerning His Probable Failure of Re-election . Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln. Volume 7 . p. 514. Donald 1996 p. 531. Randall Current 1955 p. 307. Grimsley Simpson 2001 p. 80; Paludan 1994 pp. 274293. Noll 2002 p. 426. Lincoln Abraham February 13 1953. Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln. Volume 8 . Thomas 2008 pp. 509512. Koehn Nancy 2017. Forged in Crisis: The Making of Five Legendary Leaders . NY: Scribner. p. 191. ISBN 978-1-5011-7444-5 . Donald 1996 pp. 471472. Donald 1996 pp. 485486. Nevins 1947 p. 4:206. Donald 1996 p. 554. Donald 1996 pp. 562563. Primary Documents in American History: 13th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution . Library of Congress. Archived from the original on October 10 2011 . Retrieved October 20 2011 . Carwardine 2003 pp. 242243. Lincove David A. 2000. Reconstruction in the United States: An Annotated Bibliography . Greenwood. p. 80. ISBN 978-0-313-29199-9 . Foner 2010 p. 335. Lincoln Lore Abraham Lincolns Grandfather . apps.legislature.ky.gov . Captain Abraham Lincoln of the Illinois militia . National Guard . Nichols 1974 pp. 34. Bulla Borchard 2010 p. 480. Nichols 1974 pp. 45 7. Burlingame 2008 p. 481; Nichols 1974 p. 7. Nichols 1974 p. 7. a b Bulla Borchard 2010 p. 481. Mille Lacs Band letter The Weekly Pioneer and Democrat September 19 1862 in St Paul p. 3 1 Burlingame 2008 p. 702. Mille Lacs Band offer to fight Sioux Goodhue Republican Vol. 6 No. 3 September 12 1863 2 Carley Kenneth 2001. The Dakota War of 1862 . Minnesota Historical Society Press. p. 209. Carley Kenneth 1976. The Sioux Uprising of 1862 . Minnesota Historical Society Press. p. 175. Perman Michael; Taylor Amy Murrell eds. 2013. The Civil War and Reconstruction: A Documentary Reader . Wiley-Blackwell. p. 105. Nichols David A. 1978. Lincoln and the Indians: Civil War Policy and Politics . University of Missouri Press. p. 121. Chippewa Chiefs held a war council with Gov. Ramsey to fight the Sioux on September 26 1862 3 Difference Between Court-Martial and Military Tribunal Ernesto Gapasin Military Trial Lawyers Gapasin Law Group LLC Blog 1736 E Sunshine St Suite 713 Springfield MO. October 26 2015 4 Carley Kenneth 2001. The Dakota War of 1862 . Minnesota Historical Society Press. Burlingame Michael Abraham Lincoln: A Life Baltimore Maryland: The Johns Hopkins University Press vol. 2 p. 483. Donald 1996 p. 137. Paludan 1994 p. 116. McPherson 2009 pp. 450452. Summers Robert. Abraham Lincoln . Internet Public Library 2 IPL2 . U. Michigan and Drexel U. Archived from the original on October 2 2011 . Retrieved December 9 2012 . Goodwin 2005 p. 319. Goodwin 2005 . 16341699: McCusker J. J. 1997. How Much Is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States: Addenda et Corrigenda PDF . American Antiquarian Society . 17001799: McCusker J. J. 1992. How Much Is That in Real Money? A Historical Price Index for Use as a Deflator of Money Values in the Economy of the United States PDF . American Antiquarian Society . 1800present: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis. Consumer Price Index estimate 1800 . Retrieved February 29 2024 . a b Donald 1996 p. 424. Paludan 1994 p. 111. Brands H. W. 2011. Greenback Planet: How the Dollar Conquered the World and Threatened Civilization as We Know It . University of Texas Press. p. 1. ISBN 978-0-292-73933-8 . Donald 1996 pp. 501502. a b c Donald 1996 p. 471. Schaffer Jeffrey P. 1999. Yosemite National Park: A Natural History Guide to Yosemite and Its Trails . Berkeley: Wilderness Press. p. 48. ISBN 978-0-89997-244-2 . Blue 1987 p. 245. Neill F. Sanders When A House Is on Fire: The English Consulates and Lincolns Patronage Policy. Lincoln Herald 1981 834 pp. 57959. Kevin Peraino Lincoln in the World: The Making of a Statesman and the Dawn of American Power 2014 pp. 138169. Peraino Lincoln in the World pp. 316. Donald 1996 pp. 586587. Abraham Lincolns Last Public Address . www.abrahamlincolnonline.org . Harrison 2010 pp. 34. Goodwin Doris Kearns September 26 2006. Team of Rivals: The Political Genius of Abraham Lincoln . Simon Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-7075-5 . Donald 1996 pp. 594597. Donald 1996 p. 597; Martin 2010 . Steers 2010 p. 153. Fox Richard 2015. Lincolns Body: A Cultural History . W. W. Norton Company. ISBN 978-0-393-24724-4 . Abel E. Lawrence 2015. A Finger in Lincolns Brain: What Modern Science Reveals about Lincoln His Assassination and Its Aftermath . ABC-CLIO. Chapter 14. ISBN 978-1-4408-3118-8 . OUR GREAT LOSS; The Assassination of President Lincoln . The New York Times . April 17 1865. ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on January 13 2018 . Retrieved April 12 2016 . Hay John 1915. The Life and Letters of John Hay Volume 1 . Houghton Mifflin Company. Archived from the original on August 9 2016 . Retrieved July 9 2018 . Quotes original source is Hays diary which is quoted in Abraham Lincoln: A History Volume 10 Page 292 by John G. Nicolay and John Hay Donald 1996 pp. 598599 686. Hoch Bradley R. September 4 2001. The Lincoln Trail in Pennsylvania: A History and Guide . Penn State Press. pp. 121123. ISBN 978-0-271-07222-7 . Trefousse Hans L. 1989. Andrew Johnson: A Biography . W.W. Norton Company. p. 194. Steers 2010 p. 153; Donald 1996 p. 599. Trostel 2002 pp. 3158. Trostel 2002 pp. 3158; Goodrich 2005 pp. 231238. Peck Garrett 2015. Walt Whitman in Washington D.C.: The Civil War and Americas Great Poet . Charleston SC: The History Press. pp. 11823. ISBN 978-1-62619-973-6 . Hodes 2015 p. 164. Hodes 2015 pp. 197199. Hodes 2015 pp. 84 86 9697. Survey of Historic Sites and Buildings Lincoln Tomb Illinois . National Park Service . Archived from the original on August 30 2009. Carwardine 2003 p. 4; Wilson 1999 p. 84. Donald 1996 pp. 4849 514515. Lincoln Abraham 2001 1953. Handbill Replying to Charges of Infidelity . Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln. Volume 1 . p. 383. a b Noll 1992 . Religious Quotations by Abraham Lincoln . www.abrahamlincolnonline.org . Retrieved March 14 2020 . Donald 1996 pp. 4849. Parrillo 2000 pp. 227253. White 2009 p. 180. Brodrecht Grant R. 2008. Our Country : Northern Evangelicals and the Union During the Civil War and Reconstruction . University of Notre Dame. Wilson 1999 pp. 251254. Wilson 1999 p. 254 quoting Lincoln Abraham Meditation on the Divine Will September 2 1862? . Letter by Abraham Lincoln to Albert Hodges . www.abrahamlincolnonline.org . Retrieved March 14 2020 . Wills Garry September 1 1999. Lincolns Greatest Speech . The Atlantic . Retrieved March 14 2020 . ; White Jr. Ronald C. Lincolns Greatest Speech: The Second Inaugural New York: Simon Schuster 2002. Lincoln Abraham 2001 1953. Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln. Volume 8 . Inaugural Addresses of the Presidents of the United States: from George Washington 1789 to George Bush 1989 . avalon.law.yale.edu . Retrieved March 14 2020 . Carwardine 2003 pp. 2755. Guelzo 1999 p. 434. What Can Lincolns DNA Tell Us? . February 13 2009 . Retrieved February 20 2020 . Hirschhorn Norbert; Feldman Robert G.; Greaves Ian Summer 2001. Abraham Lincolns Blue Pills: Did Our 16th President Suffer from Mercury Poisoning? . Perspectives in Biology and Medicine . 44 3. Johns Hopkins University Press: 315322. doi : 10.1353pbm.2001.0048 . PMID 11482002 . S2CID 37918186 . Retrieved September 10 2021 . Sotos John G. 2008. The Physical Lincoln Sourcebook . Mt. Vernon Book Systems. ISBN 978-0-9818193-3-4 . Mayell Hillary July 17 2001. Did Mercury in Little Blue Pills Make Abraham Lincoln Erratic? . National Geographic News . Archived from the original on July 20 2001 . Retrieved October 12 2009 . a b Verghese Abraham May 20 2009. Was Lincoln Dying Before He Was Shot? . The Atlantic . Palo Alto California. Archived from the original on April 13 2014 . Retrieved October 8 2014 . Thomas 2008 p. 61. Jaffa 2000 p. 399; Thomas 2008 p. 61. Diggins 1986 p. 307; Thomas 2008 p. 61. Foner 2010 p. 215; Thomas 2008 p. 61. Jaffa 2000 p. 263; Thomas 2008 p. 61. Burton Orville Vernon 2008. The Age of Lincoln: A History . Farrar Straus and Giroux. ISBN 978-1-4299-3955-3 . Boritt Pinsker 2002 pp. 196198 229231 301. Current 1999 . a b Wilentz 2012 . Harris 2007 p. 2. Randall 1962 p. 175. Belz 1998 p. 86. Burt Andrew May 13 2013. These United States: How Obamas Vocal Tic Reveals a Polarized America . The Atlantic . Retrieved February 14 2020 . Douglass 2008 pp. 259260. Lindgren James November 16 2000. Rating the Presidents of the United States 17892000 . The Federalist Society . Retrieved February 14 2020 . Densen John V. ed. 2001. Reassessing The Presidency The Rise of the Executive State and the Decline of Freedom . Auburn Alabama: Ludwig von Mises Institute . pp. ix 132. ISBN 978-0-945466-29-1 . Newport Frank February 28 2011. Americans Say Reagan Is the Greatest U.S. President . Gallup.com . Archived from the original on March 14 2012 . Retrieved February 13 2019 . Taranto Leo 2004 p. 264. Chesebrough 1994 pp. 76 79 106 110. Fornieri Joseph R.; Gabbard Sara Vaughn 2008. Lincolns America: 18091865 . Carbondale Illinois: SIU Press . p. 19. ISBN 978-0-8093-8713-7 . Randall 1962 pp. 6587. Schwartz 2000 p. 109. Boritt Pinsker 2002 p. 222. a b Schwartz 2008 pp. 23 9198. Schwartz 2008 pp. xi 9 24. Schwartz 2008 pp. xi 9. The origin of the nickname is unknown. A Civil War Mystery: Who Named Lincoln the Great Emancipator? Wheeler Linda The Washington Post May 17 2001. Zilversmit Arthur 1980. Lincoln and the Problem of Race: A Decade of Interpretations . Journal of the Abraham Lincoln Association . 2 1. Springfield Illinois: Abraham Lincoln Association: 2224. Archived from the original on October 25 2015 . Retrieved December 2 2018 . Barr John M. Winter 2014. Holding Up a Flawed Mirror to the American Soul: Abraham Lincoln in the Writings of Lerone Bennett Jr . Journal of the Abraham Lincoln Association . 35 1. Springfield Illinois: Abraham Lincoln Association: 4365. Bennett 1968 pp. 3542. Cashin 2002 p. 61; Kelley Lewis 2005 p. 228. Striner 2006 p. 1. DiLorenzo Thomas The Real Lincoln : A New Look at Abraham Lincoln His Agenda and an Unnecessary War Roseville California: Prima 2002. Dirck 2009 p. 382. Havers Grant N. November 13 2009. Lincoln and the Politics of Christian Love . University of Missouri Press. p. 96. ISBN 978-0-8262-1857-5 . Belz 2014 pp. 514518; Graebner 1959 pp. 6794; Smith 2010 pp. 4345. Carwardine Richard; Sexton Jay eds. 2011. The Global Lincoln . Oxford England: Oxford UP. pp. 7 910 54. ISBN 978-0-19-537911-2 . Schwartz 2008 p. 146. Donald 1996 p. 15. Hirschkorn Phil January 17 2009. The Obama-Lincoln Parallel: A Closer Look . CBS News . New York City: CBS Corporation . Archived from the original on August 22 2016 . Retrieved January 26 2017 . Jackson David January 10 2013. Obama to be sworn in with Lincoln King Bibles . USA Today . McLean Virginia. Archived from the original on March 24 2015 . Retrieved March 2 2016 . Hornick Ed January 18 2009. For Obama Lincoln was model president . CNN . Atlanta Georgia. Archived from the original on July 18 2018 . Retrieved August 5 2018 . Spielberg Steven ; Kushner Tony ; Kearns Goodwin Doris 2012. Mr. Lincoln Goes to Hollywood . Smithsonian . Vol. 43 no. 7. Washington D.C.: Smithsonian Institution . pp. 4653. Stokes Melvyn 2011. Abraham Lincoln and the Movies . American Nineteenth Century History . 12 2: 203231. doi : 10.108014664658.2011.594651 . S2CID 146375501 . Samuels Shirley 2012. The Cambridge Companion to Abraham Lincoln . Cambridge Companions to American Studies. Cambridge University Press . p. 156. ISBN 978-0-521-19316-0 . John Avlon 2023. Lincoln and the Fight for Peace . Simon and Schuster. ISBN 9781982108137 . Gaines Kevin September 8 2011. From Colonization to Anti-colonialism . The Global Lincoln . Oxford University Press . pp. 259271. doi : 10.1093acprof:osobl9780195379112.003.0015 . ISBN 978-0-19-537911-2 . On August 6 1863 after Lincoln had issued the Emancipation Proclamation Garibaldi wrote to Lincoln Posterity will call you the great emancipator a more enviable title than any crown could be and greater than any merely mundane treasure . Ron Field Garibaldi: Leadership Strategy Conflict Osprey Publishing 2011 p. 51. . 2022. : in Russian. Litres. p. 93. ISBN 978-5-04-333255-4 . Retrieved March 24 2023 . Chinese Resistance Issue . National Postal Museum . December 31 2019. Houseman Donna; Kloetzel James E.; Snee Chad October 2018. Scott Specialized Catalogue of United States Stamps Covers 2019 . Amos Media Company. ISBN 978-0-89487-559-5 . Collea 2018 pp. 1314. Dennis 2018 p. 194. Dennis 2018 p. 197. History of USS Abraham Lincoln CVN 72 . United States Department of the Navy . Archived from the original on June 27 2019 . Retrieved February 13 2020 . Pearson Michael February 16 2016. 18.5 million gift to help refurbish Lincoln Memorial . CNN . Retrieved February 13 2020 . a b Nyce Caroline Mimbs May 21 2015. 15 Most Visited National Landmarks in Washington D.C. The Atlantic . Retrieved February 13 2020 . The Petersen House Fords Theatre . U.S. National Park Service . Retrieved February 13 2020 . Abraham Lincoln Historical Tours in Springfield Illinois . lincolnlibraryandmuseum.com . Retrieved February 13 2020 . Mount Rushmore National Memorial . U.S. National Park Service. Archived from the original on October 1 2011 . Retrieved November 13 2010 . Abraham Lincoln in Cornish . nps.gov . April 18 2016. Katz Jamie. Why Abraham Lincoln Was Revered in Mexico . Smithsonian . Retrieved December 24 2018 . Tolles Thayer 2013. Abraham Lincoln: The Man Standing Lincoln: a bronze statuette by Augustus Saint-Gaudens . Metropolitan Museum Journal . 48 : 22337. doi : 10.1086675325 . S2CID 192203987 . Congress Dedicates Lincoln Room U.S. Capitol Historical Society . United States Capitol Historical Society . June 12 2019 . Retrieved June 12 2022 . Legislation to Name Room in US Capitol Lincoln Room Passes House . Congressman Darin LaHood . December 21 2018 . Retrieved June 12 2022 . LINCOLN Abraham US House of Representatives: History Art Archives . history.house.gov . Retrieved June 12 2022 . Bibliography See also: Bibliography of Abraham Lincoln Ambrose Stephen E. 1996. Halleck: Lincolns Chief of Staff . Baton Rouge Louisiana: LSU Press. ISBN 978-0-8071-5539-4 . Baker Jean H. 1989. Mary Todd Lincoln: A Biography . New York New York: W. W. Norton Company. ISBN 978-0-393-30586-9 . Bartelt William E. 2008. There I Grew Up: Remembering Abraham Lincolns Indiana Youth . Indianapolis Indiana: Indiana Historical Society Press. ISBN 978-0-87195-263-9 . Belz Herman 1998. Abraham Lincoln Constitutionalism and Equal Rights in the Civil War era . New York New York: Fordham University Press. ISBN 978-0-8232-1768-7 . Belz Herman 2014. Lincoln Abraham . In Frohnen Bruce ; Beer Jeremy; Nelson Jeffrey O eds.. American Conservatism: An Encyclopedia . Open Road Media. ISBN 978-1-932236-43-9 . Bennett Lerone Jr. 1968. Was Abe Lincoln a White Supremacist? . Ebony . Vol. 23 no. 4. ISSN 0012-9011 . Blue Frederick J. 1987. Salmon P. Chase: A Life in Politics . Kent Ohio: Kent State University Press. ISBN 978-0-87338-340-0 . Boritt Gabor S. ; Pinsker Matthew 2002. Abraham Lincoln . In Graff Henry ed.. The Presidents: A Reference History 7th ed.. Macmillan Library Reference USA. ISBN 978-0-684-80551-1 . Bulla David W.; Borchard Gregory A. 2010. Journalism in the Civil War Era . New York New York: Peter Lang. ISBN 978-1-4331-0722-1 . Burlingame Michael 2008. Abraham Lincoln: A Life . 2 vols. One-volume edition edited and abridged by Jonathan W. White 2023. Carpenter F. B. Six Months at the White House with Abraham Lincoln: The Story of a Picture New York: Hurd and Houghton 1866; also published as The Inner Life of Abraham Lincoln: Six Months at the White House New York: Hurd and Houghton 1867 pubdate 1868. Carwardine Richard J. 2003. Lincoln . London England: Pearson Longman. ISBN 978-0-582-03279-8 . Cashin Joan E. 2002. The War was You and Me: Civilians in the American Civil War . Princeton New Jersey: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-09174-7 . Chesebrough David B. 1994. No Sorrow Like Our Sorrow: Northern Protestant Ministers and the Assassination of Lincoln . Kent Ohio: Kent State University Press. ISBN 978-0-87338-491-9 . Collea Joseph D. Collea Jr. September 20 2018. New York and the Lincoln Specials: The Presidents Pre-Inaugural and Funeral Trains Cross the Empire State . McFarland. pp. 1314. ISBN 978-1-4766-3324-4 . Cox Hank H. 2005. Lincoln and the Sioux Uprising of 1862 . Nashville Tennessee: Cumberland House. ISBN 978-1-58182-457-5 . Current Richard N. July 28 1999. Abraham Lincoln - Early political career . Encyclopedia Britannica . Dennis Matthew 2018. Red White and Blue Letter Days: An American Calendar . Ithaca New York: Cornell University Press. ISBN 978-1-5017-2370-4 . Diggins John P. 1986. The Lost Soul of American Politics: Virtue Self-Interest and the Foundations of Liberalism . Chicago Illinois: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-14877-9 . Dirck Brian September 2009. Father Abraham: Lincolns Relentless Struggle to End Slavery and: Act of Justice: Lincolns Emancipation Proclamation and the Law of War and: Lincoln and Freedom: Slavery Emancipation and the Thirteenth Amendment review . Civil War History . 55 3: 382385. doi : 10.1353cwh.0.0090 . S2CID 143986160 . Dirck Brian R. 2008. Lincoln the Lawyer . Champaign Illinois: University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-07614-5 . Donald David Herbert 1996. Lincoln . New York New York: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-0-684-82535-9 . Douglass Frederick 2008. The Life and Times of Frederick Douglass . New York New York: Cosimo Classics. ISBN 978-1-60520-399-7 . Edgar Walter B. 1998. South Carolina: A History . Columbia South Carolina: University of South Carolina Press. ISBN 978-1-57003-255-4 . Ellenberg Jordan May 23 2021. What Honest Abe Learned from Geometry . The Wall Street Journal . Vol. 278 no. 119. pp. C3. Ellenbergs essay is adapted from his 2021 book Shape: The Hidden Geometry of Information Biology Strategy Democracy and Everything Else Penguin Press. ISBN 9781984879059 Fish Carl Russell 1902. Lincoln and the Patronage . The American Historical Review . 8 1: 5369. doi : 10.23071832574 . JSTOR 1832574 . Foner Eric 2010. The Fiery Trial: Abraham Lincoln and American Slavery . New York New York: W. W. Norton Company. ISBN 978-0-393-06618-0 . Goodrich Thomas 2005. The Darkest Dawn: Lincoln Booth and the Great American Tragedy . Indianapolis Indiana: Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-34567-7 . Goodwin Doris Kearns 2005. Team of Rivals: The Political Genius of Abraham Lincoln . New York New York: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-0-684-82490-1 . Graebner Norman 1959. Abraham Lincoln: Conservative Statesman . In Basler Roy Prentice ed.. The enduring Lincoln: Lincoln sesquicentennial lectures at the University of Illinois . Champaign Illinois: University of Illinois Press. OCLC 428674 . Grimsley Mark ; Simpson Brooks D. 2001. The Collapse of the Confederacy . Lincoln Nebraska: University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0-8032-2170-3 . Guelzo Allen C. 1999. Abraham Lincoln: Redeemer President . Grand Rapids Michigan: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-8028-3872-8 . . Second edition 2022. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company. ISBN 978-0-8028-7858-8 Guelzo Allen C. 2004. Lincolns Emancipation Proclamation: The End of Slavery in America . New York New York: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-2182-5 . Harrison J. Houston 1935. Settlers by the Long Grey Trail . Joseph K. Ruebush Co. Harrison Lowell 2010. Lincoln of Kentucky . Lexington Kentucky: University Press of Kentucky. ISBN 978-0-8131-2940-2 . Harris William C. 2007. Lincolns Rise to the Presidency . Lawrence Kansas: University Press of Kansas. ISBN 978-0-7006-1520-9 . Harris William C. 2011. Lincoln and the Border States: Preserving the Union . Lawrence Kansas: University Press of Kansas. Heidler David Stephen; Heidler Jeanne T.; Coles David J. eds. 2002. Encyclopedia of the American Civil War: A Political Social and Military History . New York New York: W. W. Norton Company. ISBN 978-0-393-04758-5 . Heidler David Stephen; Heidler Jeanne T. 2006. The Mexican War . Santa Barbara California: Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-313-32792-6 . Hodes Martha 2015. Mourning Lincoln . New Haven Connecticut: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-21356-0 . Hofstadter Richard 1938. The Tariff Issue on the Eve of the Civil War . The American Historical Review . 44 1: 5055. doi : 10.23071840850 . JSTOR 1840850 . Holzer Harold 2004. Lincoln at Cooper Union: The Speech That Made Abraham Lincoln President . New York New York: Simon Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-9964-0 . Jaffa Harry V. 2000. A New Birth of Freedom: Abraham Lincoln and the Coming of the Civil War . Lanham Maryland: Rowman Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-8476-9952-0 . Kelley Robin D. G. ; Lewis Earl 2005. To Make Our World Anew: Volume I: A History of African Americans to 1880 . Oxford England: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-804006-4 . Lamb Brian P. ; Swain Susan eds. 2008. Abraham Lincoln: Great American Historians on Our Sixteenth President . New York New York: PublicAffairs. ISBN 978-1-58648-676-1 . Lupton John A. 2006. Abraham Lincoln and the Corwin Amendment . Illinois Heritage . 9 5: 34. Archived from the original on August 24 2016. Luthin Reinhard H. 1944. Abraham Lincoln and the Tariff . The American Historical Review . 49 4: 609629. doi : 10.23071850218 . JSTOR 1850218 . Madison James H. 2014. Hoosiers: A New History of Indiana . Indianapolis Indiana: Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-0-253-01308-8 . Mansch Larry D. 2005. Abraham Lincoln President-elect: The Four Critical Months from Election to Inauguration . Jefferson North Carolina: McFarland Company. ISBN 978-0-7864-2026-1 . Martin Paul April 8 2010. Lincolns Missing Bodyguard . Smithsonian Magazine . Archived from the original on September 27 2011 . Retrieved October 15 2010 . McGovern George S. 2009. Abraham Lincoln: The American Presidents Series: The 16th President 18611865 . New York New York: Henry Holt and Company. ISBN 978-0-8050-8345-3 . McPherson James M. 1992. Abraham Lincoln and the Second American Revolution . New York New York: Oxford University Press USA. ISBN 978-0-19-507606-6 . McPherson James M. 2009. Abraham Lincoln . New York New York: Oxford University Press USA. ISBN 978-0-19-537452-0 . Meacham Jon 2022. And There Was Light: Abraham Lincoln and the American Struggle . Random House. ISBN 978-0-55-339396-5 . Morse John Torrey 1893. Abraham Lincoln . Vol. I. Cambridge Mass. Riverside Press. Morse John Torrey 1893. Abraham Lincoln . Vol. II. Cambridge Mass. Riverside Press. Neely Mark E. Jr. 1992. The Fate of Liberty: Abraham Lincoln and Civil Liberties . New York New York: Oxford University Press USA. Archived from the original on October 29 2014. Neely Mark E. Jr. 2004. Was the Civil War a Total War? . Civil War History . 50 4: 434458. doi : 10.1353cwh.2004.0073 . S2CID 258106755 . Nevins Allan 1959. The War for the Union . New York New York: Scribner. ISBN 978-0-684-10416-4 . Nevins Allan 1947. The War for the Union and Ordeal of the Union and the Emergence of Lincoln . New York New York: Scribner. Nichols David Allen 1974. The Other Civil War: Lincoln and the Indians PDF . Minnesota History . Archived PDF from the original on October 9 2022. Noll Mark A. 1992. A History of Christianity in the United States and Canada . Grand Rapids Michigan: Wm. B. Eerdmans. ISBN 978-0-8028-0651-2 . Noll Mark A. 2002. Americas God: From Jonathan Edwards to Abraham Lincoln . New York New York: Oxford University Press USA. ISBN 978-0-19-515111-4 . Oates Stephen B. 1974. Abraham Lincoln 18611865 . In Woodward Comer Vann ed.. Responses of the Presidents to Charges of Misconduct . New York New York: Dell Publishing. ISBN 978-0-440-05923-3 . Paludan Phillip Shaw 1994. The Presidency of Abraham Lincoln . Lawrence Kansas: University Press of Kansas. ISBN 978-0-7006-0671-9 . Parrillo Nicholas 2000. Lincolns Calvinist Transformation: Emancipation and War . Civil War History . 46 3: 227253. doi : 10.1353cwh.2000.0073 . ISSN 1533-6271 . S2CID 143755083 . Potter David M. 1977. The Impending Crisis: America Before the Civil War 18481861 . New York New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-131929-7 . Randall James Garfield 1962. Lincoln: The Liberal Statesman . New York New York: Dodd Mead Co. ASIN B0051VUQXO . Randall James Garfield; Current Richard Nelson 1955. Lincoln the President: Last Full Measure . Vol. IV. New York New York: Dodd Mead Co. OCLC 950556947 . Richards John T. 2015. Abraham Lincoln: The Lawyer-Statesman Classic Reprint . London England: Fbc Limited. ISBN 978-1-331-28158-0 . Sandburg Carl 1926. Abraham Lincoln: The Prairie Years . San Diego California: Harcourt. OCLC 6579822 . Sandburg Carl 2002. Abraham Lincoln: The Prairie Years and the War Years . Boston Massachusetts: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. ISBN 978-0-15-602752-6 . Schwartz Barry 2000. Abraham Lincoln and the Forge of National Memory . Chicago Illinois: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-74197-0 . Schwartz Barry 2008. Abraham Lincoln in the Post-Heroic Era: History and Memory in Late Twentieth-Century America . Chicago Illinois: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-74188-8 . Sherman William T. 1990. Memoirs of General W.T. Sherman . Charleston South Carolina: BiblioBazaar. ISBN 978-1-174-63172-6 . Simon Paul 1990. Lincolns Preparation for Greatness: The Legislative Years . Champaign Illinois: University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-00203-8 . Smith Robert C. 2010. Conservatism and Racism and Why in America They Are the Same . Albany New York: State University of New York Press. ISBN 978-1-4384-3233-5 . Steers Edward Jr. 2010. The Lincoln Assassination Encyclopedia . New York New York: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-178775-1 . Striner Richard 2006. Father Abraham: Lincolns Relentless Struggle to End Slavery . England London: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-518306-1 . Taranto James ; Leo Leonard eds. 2004. Presidential Leadership: Rating the Best and the Worst in the White House . New York New York: Free Press. ISBN 978-0-7432-5433-5 . Tegeder Vincent G. 1948. Lincoln and the Territorial Patronage: The Ascendancy of the Radicals in the West . The Mississippi Valley Historical Review . 35 1: 7790. doi : 10.23071895140 . JSTOR 1895140 . Thomas Benjamin P. 2008. Abraham Lincoln: A Biography . Carbondale Illinois: Southern Illinois University Press. ISBN 978-0-8093-2887-1 . Trostel Scott D. 2002. The Lincoln Funeral Train: The Final Journey and National Funeral for Abraham Lincoln . Fletcher Ohio: Cam-Tech Publishing. ISBN 978-0-925436-21-4 . Archived from the original on July 12 2013. Vile John R. 2003. Lincoln Abraham 18091865 . Encyclopedia of Constitutional Amendments: Proposed Amendments and Amending Issues 17892002 2nd ed.. ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1-85109-428-8 . Vorenberg Michael 2001. Final Freedom: The Civil War the Abolition of Slavery and the Thirteenth Amendment . Cambridge England: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-65267-4 . Warren Louis A. 2017. Lincolns Youth: Indiana Years Seven to Twenty-One 18161830 Classic Reprint . London England: Fbc Limited. ISBN 978-0-282-90830-0 . White Ronald C. 2009. A. Lincoln: A Biography . New York New York: Random House. ISBN 978-1-58836-775-4 . Wilentz Sean 2012. Abraham Lincoln and Jacksonian Democracy . Gilder Lehrman Institute of American History . Archived from the original on August 18 2016. Wills Garry 2012. Lincoln at Gettysburg: The Words that Remade America . New York New York: Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4391-2645-5 . Wilson Douglas L. 1997. Lincoln Before Washington: New Perspectives on the Illinois Years . Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press. ISBN 0-252-02331-5 . Wilson Douglas L.; Davis Rodney O.; Wilson Terry; Herndon William Henry; Weik Jesse William 1998. Herndons Informants: Letters Interviews and Statements about Abraham Lincoln . Univ of Illinois Press. pp. 3536. ISBN 978-0-252-02328-6 . Wilson Douglas L. 1999. Honors Voice: The Transformation of Abraham Lincoln . New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-307-76581-9 . Wilson Douglas L. 2007. Lincolns Sword: The Presidency and the Power of Words . New York: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-1-4000-4039-1 . Winkle Kenneth J. 2001. The Young Eagle: The Rise of Abraham Lincoln . Lanham Maryland: Taylor Trade Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4617-3436-9 . Zarefsky David 1993. Lincoln Douglas and Slavery: In the Crucible of Public Debate . Chicago Illinois: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-97876-5 . External links Abraham Lincoln at Wikipedias sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Library resources about Abraham Lincoln Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Abraham Lincoln Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Official Abraham Lincoln Presidential Library and Museum The Lincoln Presidential Librarys ongoing digitization of all documents written by or to Abraham Lincoln during his lifetime Collected Works of Abraham Lincoln complete collected works as edited by Basler et al. 1958 an online edition available through University of Michigan Library Digital Collections Organizations Abraham Lincoln Association Archived April 28 2020 at the Wayback Machine Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Foundation Media coverage Abraham Lincoln collected news and commentary at The New York Times Other United States Congress. Abraham Lincoln id: L000313 . Biographical Directory of the United States Congress . Abraham Lincoln: A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress Life Portrait of Abraham Lincoln from C-SPAN s American presidents: Life Portraits June 28 1999 Writings of Abraham Lincoln from C-SPAN s American Writers: A Journey Through History Abraham Lincoln: Original Letters and Manuscripts Shapell Manuscript Foundation LincolnNet: Abraham Lincoln Historical Digitization Project Northern Illinois University Libraries Teaching Abraham Lincoln Archived December 10 2017 at the Wayback Machine National Endowment for the Humanities Works by Abraham Lincoln at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Abraham Lincoln at the Internet Archive Works by Abraham Lincoln at LibriVox public domain audiobooks In Popular Song: Our Noble Chief Has Passed Away by CooperThomas Abraham Lincoln Recollections and Newspaper Articles Collection Archived November 13 2018 at the Wayback Machine McLean County Museum of History Digitized items in the Alfred Whital Stern Collection of Lincolniana in the Rare Book and Special Collections Division in the Library of Congress v t e Abraham Lincoln 16th President of the United States 18611865 U.S. Representative for IL7 18471849 Presidency Transition First inauguration Perpetual Union Lincoln Bible Second inauguration Civil War Confiscation Acts President Lincolns 75 000 volunteers War based income tax Seaports blockade RMS Trent Affair Habeas Corpus suspended Emancipation Proclamation West Virginia statehood Overland Campaign strategy Hampton Roads Conference Tour of Richmond Ten percent plan Reconstruction Foreign policy 13th Amendment abolishing slavery Dakota War of 1862 Department of the Northwest Homestead Act of 1862 National Banking Acts Thanksgiving Day Fanny McCullough letter Birchard Letter Bixby letter National Academy of Sciences Department of Agriculture Pardons State of the Union Address 1863 1864 Cabinet Judicial appointments Speeches Lyceum address 1838 Peoria speech 1854 Lost Speech 1856 House Divided speech 1858 LincolnDouglas debates 1858 Cooper Union Address 1860 Farewell Address 1861 First inaugural address 1861 Gettysburg Address 1863 event Second inaugural address 1865 Life and views Early life and career Black Hawk War Matson Trial Spot Resolutions Boat lifting patent Hurd v. Rock Island Bridge Co. Baltimore Plot Lincolns beard Medical and mental health Poetry Political career 18491861 Religious views Sexuality Slavery Homes and places Lincoln Birthplace Knob Creek Farm Lincoln Boyhood Memorial Lincoln State Park Little Pigeon Creek Community Lincoln Trail Homestead State Memorial Lincolns New Salem Lincoln-Berry General Store Lincoln Home Cottage at the Soldiers Home Lincoln Bedroom Lincoln Sitting Room Lincoln Pioneer Village Lincoln Log Cabin State Historic Site Elections Republican National Convention 1856 1860 1864 National Union Party 1860 United States presidential election 1864 1860 campaign song Assassination Fords Theater Our American Cousin opera John Wilkes Booth Sic semper tyrannis Petersen House State funeral Lincoln catafalque Lincoln Tomb O Captain! My Captain! When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloomd Legacy and memorials Presidential Library and Museum Papers LincolnNet Artifacts and relics Bibliography Birthday Photographs of Lincoln Cultural depictions films Art Currency Illinois Centennial half dollar Lincoln penny Five-dollar bill Mount Rushmore Anniversary coins Postage stamps Abraham Lincoln Association Abraham Lincoln Institute Association of Lincoln Presenters USS Abraham Lincoln 1960 1988 Here I Grew Up mosaic Lincoln Highway Lincoln Nebraska Lincoln Park Chicago Lincoln Park D.C. Lincoln Prize Lincoln Heritage Trail Lincoln Trail State Memorial LincolnKennedy coincidences Great Moments with Mr. Lincoln White House ghost Statues Lincoln Memorial statue reflecting pool Mount Rushmore Abraham Lincoln: The Man Abraham Lincoln: The Head of State Lincoln the Lawyer Young Abe Lincoln Emancipation Memorial Brooklyn relief Cincinnati D.C. City Hall Hodgenville Kentucky Indianapolis relief Laramie Wyoming Lincoln Nebraska Los Angeles Louisville Kentucky Newark New Jersey New York City Parliament Square London Philadelphia Rochester U.S. Capitol bust U.S. Capitol statue Wabash Indiana Family Family tree Mary Todd Lincoln wife Robert Todd Lincoln son Edward Baker Lincoln son William Wallace Lincoln son Thomas Tad Lincoln III son Mary Todd Mamie Lincoln granddaughter Jessie Harlan Lincoln granddaughter Thomas Lincoln father Nancy Hanks Lincoln mother Sarah Bush Lincoln stepmother Sarah Lincoln Grigsby sister Abraham Lincoln grandfather Mordecai Lincoln uncle Mary Lincoln Crume aunt John Hanks cousin Joseph Hanks great-grandfather Samuel Lincoln 17th-century ancestor Mary Lincoln Beckwith great-granddaughter Robert Todd Lincoln Beckwith great-grandson Old Bob horse Fido dog James Buchanan Andrew Johnson Category Outline Offices and distinctions U.S. House of Representatives Preceded by John Henry Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Illinoiss 7th congressional district 18471849 Succeeded by Thomas Harris Party political offices Preceded by John Fremont Republican nominee for President of the United States 1860 1864 Succeeded by Ulysses Grant Political offices Preceded by James Buchanan President of the United States 18611865 Succeeded by Andrew Johnson Honorary titles Preceded by Henry Clay Persons who have lain in state or honor in the United States Capitol rotunda 1865 Succeeded by Thaddeus Stevens Articles related to Abraham Lincoln v t e LincolnDouglas debates Participants Abraham Lincoln Stephen A. Douglas Other 1858 United States Senate elections Freeport Doctrine 1994 reenactments LincolnDouglas debate format v t e Presidents of the United States Presidents and presidencies George Washington 17891797 John Adams 17971801 Thomas Jefferson 18011809 James Madison 18091817 James Monroe 18171825 John Quincy Adams 18251829 Andrew Jackson 18291837 Martin Van Buren 18371841 William Henry Harrison 1841 John Tyler 18411845 James K. Polk 18451849 Zachary Taylor 18491850 Millard Fillmore 18501853 Franklin Pierce 18531857 James Buchanan 18571861 Abraham Lincoln 18611865 Andrew Johnson 18651869 Ulysses S. Grant 18691877 Rutherford B. Hayes 18771881 James A. Garfield 1881 Chester A. Arthur 18811885 Grover Cleveland 18851889 Benjamin Harrison 18891893 Grover Cleveland 18931897 William McKinley 18971901 Theodore Roosevelt 19011909 William Howard Taft 19091913 Woodrow Wilson 19131921 Warren G. Harding 19211923 Calvin Coolidge 19231929 Herbert Hoover 19291933 Franklin D. Roosevelt 19331945 Harry S. Truman 19451953 Dwight D. Eisenhower 19531961 John F. Kennedy 19611963 Lyndon B. Johnson 19631969 Richard Nixon 19691974 Gerald Ford 19741977 Jimmy Carter 19771981 Ronald Reagan 19811989 George H. W. Bush 19891993 Bill Clinton 19932001 George W. Bush 20012009 Barack Obama 20092017 Donald Trump 20172021 Joe Biden 2021present Presidency timelines Washington McKinley T. Roosevelt Taft Wilson Harding Coolidge Hoover F. D. Roosevelt Truman Eisenhower Kennedy L. B. Johnson Nixon Ford Carter Reagan G. H. W. Bush Clinton G. W. Bush Obama Trump Biden Category List v t e Republican Party History National Union Party Third Party System Fourth Party System Fifth Party System Sixth Party System Presidential tickets national conventions and presidential primaries 1856 Philadelphia : Fremont Dayton 1860 Chicago : Lincoln Hamlin 1864 Baltimore : Lincoln Johnson 1868 Chicago : Grant Colfax 1872 Philadelphia : Grant Wilson 1876 Cincinnati : Hayes Wheeler 1880 Chicago : Garfield Arthur 1884 Chicago : Blaine Logan 1888 Chicago : Harrison Morton 1892 Minneapolis : Harrison Reid 1896 Saint Louis : McKinley Hobart 1900 Philadelphia : McKinley Roosevelt 1904 Chicago : Roosevelt Fairbanks 1908 Chicago : Taft Sherman 1912 Chicago : Taft Sherman Butler primaries 1916 Chicago : Hughes Fairbanks primaries 1920 Chicago : Harding Coolidge primaries 1924 Cleveland : Coolidge Dawes primaries 1928 Kansas City : Hoover Curtis primaries 1932 Chicago : Hoover Curtis primaries 1936 Cleveland : Landon Knox primaries 1940 Philadelphia : Willkie McNary primaries 1944 Chicago : Dewey Bricker primaries 1948 Philadelphia : Dewey Warren primaries 1952 Chicago : Eisenhower Nixon primaries 1956 San Francisco : Eisenhower Nixon primaries 1960 Chicago : Nixon Lodge primaries 1964 San Francisco : Goldwater Miller primaries 1968 Miami Beach : Nixon Agnew primaries 1972 Miami Beach : Nixon Agnew primaries 1976 Kansas City : Ford Dole primaries 1980 Detroit : Reagan G. H. W. Bush primaries 1984 Dallas : Reagan G. H. W. Bush primaries 1988 New Orleans : G. H. W. Bush Quayle primaries 1992 Houston : G. H. W. Bush Quayle primaries 1996 San Diego : Dole Kemp primaries 2000 Philadelphia : G. W. Bush Cheney primaries 2004 New York : G. W. Bush Cheney primaries 2008 St. Paul : McCain Palin primaries 2012 Tampa : Romney Ryan primaries 2016 Cleveland : Trump Pence primaries 2020 Charlotteother locations : Trump Pence primaries 2024 Milwaukee : Trump Vance primaries 2028 Houston Presidential administrations Lincoln 18611865 Johnson 18651868 Grant 18691877 Hayes 18771881 Garfield 1881 Arthur 18811885 Harrison 18891893 McKinley 18971901 Roosevelt 19011909 Taft 19091913 Harding 19211923 Coolidge 19231929 Hoover 19291933 Eisenhower 19531961 Nixon 19691974 Ford 19741977 Reagan 19811989 G. H. W. Bush 19891993 G. W. Bush 20012009 Trump 20172021 U.S. Senate leaders and Conference chairs J. P. Hale 18591862 Anthony 18621884 Sherman 18841885 Edmunds 18851891 Sherman 18911897 Allison 18971908 E. Hale 19081911 Cullom 19111913 Gallinger 19131918 Lodge 19181924 Curtis 19241929 Watson 19291933 McNary 19331940 Austin 19401941 McNary 19411944 White 19441949 Wherry 19491952 Bridges 19521953 Taft 1953 Knowland 19531959 Dirksen 19591969 Scott 19691977 Baker 19771979 Stevens 19791980 Baker 19801985 Dole 19851996 Lott 19962003 Frist 20032007 McConnell 2007 U.S. House leaders Speakers and Conference chairs Pennington 18601861 Grow 18611863 Colfax 18631869 Pomeroy 1869 Blaine 18691875 McCrary 18751877 Hale 18771879 Frye 18791881 Keifer 18811883 Cannon 18831889 Reed 18891891 T. J. Henderson 18911895 Reed 18951899 D. B. Henderson 18991903 Cannon 19031911 Mann 19111919 Gillett 19191925 Longworth 19251931 Snell 19311939 Martin 19391959 Halleck 19591965 Ford 19651973 Rhodes 19731981 Michel 19811995 Gingrich 19951999 Hastert 19992007 Boehner 20072015 Ryan 20152019 McCarthy 20192023 Johnson 2023 RNC Chairs Morgan Raymond Ward Claflin Morgan Chandler Cameron Jewell Sabin Jones Quay Clarkson Campbell Carter Hanna Payne Cortelyou New Hitchcock Hill Rosewater Hilles Wilcox Hays Adams Butler Work Huston Fess Sanders Fletcher Hamilton Martin Walsh Spangler Brownell Reece Scott Gabrielson Summerfield Roberts Hall Alcorn T. Morton Miller Burch Bliss R. Morton Dole Bush Smith Brock Richards Laxalt Fahrenkopf Fahrenkopf Atwater Yeutter Bond Barbour Nicholson Gilmore Racicot Gillespie Mehlman Martinez Duncan Duncan Steele Priebus McDaniel Whatley Chair elections 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023 2024 Parties by state and territory State Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Territory American Samoa District of Columbia Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Affiliated organizations Congress House Conference Legislative Digest Steering and Policy Committees Senate Conference Policy Committee Factions Freedom Caucus Problem Solvers Caucus Republican Governance Group Republican Study Committee Fundraising groups National Republican Congressional Committee National Republican Redistricting Trust National Republican Senatorial Committee Republican Attorneys General Association Republican Governors Association Sectional groups College Republicans Chairmen Congressional Hispanic Conference Log Cabin Republicans Republican Jewish Coalition Republican National Hispanic Assembly Republicans Abroad Teen Age Republicans Young Republicans Republicans Overseas High School Republican National Federation Factional groups Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Majority for Choice Republican Liberty Caucus Republican National Coalition for Life ConservAmerica Liberty Caucus Ripon Society The Wish List Related Primaries Debates Bibliography International Democracy Union Timeline of modern American conservatism Trumpism v t e Illinois s delegations to the 30th United States Congress ordered by seniority 30th Senate : S. Breese D S. Douglas D House : O. Ficklin D J. McClernand D R. Smith ID J. Wentworth D A. Lincoln W T. Turner D W. Richardson D v t e Historical anti-slavery parties in the United States Presidential tickets Liberty Party James G. Birney Thomas Earle 1840 James G. Birney Thomas Morris 1844 Free Soil Party Martin Van Buren Charles F. Adams 1848 John P. Hale George W. Julian 1852 Republican Party John C. Fremont William L. Dayton 1856 Abraham Lincoln Hannibal Hamlin 1860 National Union Party Abraham Lincoln Andrew Johnson 1864 National conventions 1848 Free Soil 1856 Republican 1860 Republican 1864 National Union Other party leaders Gerrit Smith Salmon P. Chase Charles Sumner William H. Seward Simon Cameron Edward Bates Francis P. Blair Related groups American Anti-Slavery Society Anti-Nebraska movement Barnburners Conscience Whigs North American Party Radical Democracy Party v t e Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees John Adams John Quincy Adams Jane Addams Louis Agassiz Susan B. Anthony John James Audubon George Bancroft Clara Barton Henry Ward Beecher Alexander Graham Bell Daniel Boone Edwin Booth Louis Brandeis Phillips Brooks William Cullen Bryant Luther Burbank Andrew Carnegie George Washington Carver William Ellery Channing Rufus Choate Henry Clay Grover Cleveland James Fenimore Cooper Peter Cooper Charlotte Cushman James Buchanan Eads Thomas Alva Edison Jonathan Edwards Ralph Waldo Emerson David Farragut Stephen Foster Benjamin Franklin Robert Fulton Josiah W. Gibbs William C. Gorgas Ulysses S. Grant Asa Gray Alexander Hamilton Nathaniel Hawthorne Joseph Henry Patrick Henry Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. Mark Hopkins Elias Howe Washington Irving Andrew Jackson Thomas J. Jackson Thomas Jefferson John Paul Jones James Kent Sidney Lanier Robert E. Lee Abraham Lincoln Henry Wadsworth Longfellow James Russell Lowell Mary Lyon Edward MacDowell James Madison Horace Mann John Marshall Matthew Fontaine Maury Albert A. Michelson Maria Mitchell James Monroe Samuel F. B. Morse William T. G. Morton John Lothrop Motley Simon Newcomb Thomas Paine Alice Freeman Palmer Francis Parkman George Peabody William Penn Edgar Allan Poe Walter Reed Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Augustus Saint-Gaudens William Tecumseh Sherman John Philip Sousa Joseph Story Harriet Beecher Stowe Gilbert Stuart Sylvanus Thayer Henry David Thoreau Mark Twain Lillian Wald Booker T. Washington George Washington Daniel Webster George Westinghouse James McNeill Whistler Walt Whitman Eli Whitney John Greenleaf Whittier Emma Willard Frances Willard Roger Williams Woodrow Wilson Orville Wright Wilbur Wright v t e Cabinet of President Abraham Lincoln 18611865 Secretary of State William H. Seward 18611865 Secretary of the Treasury Salmon P. Chase 18611864 William P. Fessenden 18641865 Hugh McCulloch 1865 Secretary of War Simon Cameron 18611862 Edwin Stanton 18621865 Attorney General Edward Bates 18611864 James Speed 18641865 Postmaster General Montgomery Blair 18611864 William Dennison Jr. 18641865 Secretary of the Navy Gideon Welles 18611865 Secretary of the Interior Caleb Blood Smith 18611862 John Palmer Usher 18631865 Related Team of Rivals 2005 book v t e 1852 1856 United States presidential election 1860 Democratic Party Convention Nominees President: James Buchanan Vice President: John C. Breckinridge Other candidates Lewis Cass Stephen A. Douglas Franklin Pierce incumbent Republican Party Convention Nominees President: John C. Fremont Vice President: William L. Dayton Other candidates Nathaniel P. Banks Abraham Lincoln John McLean Robert F. Stockton American Party Nominees President: Millard Fillmore Vice President: Andrew J. Donelson Other candidates George Law Other 1856 elections : House Senate v t e 1856 1860 United States presidential election 1864 Republican Party Convention Nominees President: Abraham Lincoln Vice President: Hannibal Hamlin Other candidates Edward Bates Simon Cameron Salmon P. Chase William L. Dayton John McLean William H. Seward Benjamin Wade Democratic Party Southern Convention Nominees President: John C. Breckinridge incumbent VP Vice President: Joseph Lane Other candidates Daniel S. Dickinson Constitutional Union Party Convention Nominees President: John Bell Vice President: Edward Everett Other candidates John J. Crittenden William A. Graham Sam Houston William C. Rives Democratic Party Northern Conventions Nominees President: Stephen A. Douglas Vice President: Herschel V. Johnson Other candidates Daniel S. Dickinson James Guthrie Robert M. T. Hunter Andrew Johnson Other 1860 elections : House Senate v t e 1860 1864 United States presidential election 1868 National Union Party Convention Nominees President: Abraham Lincoln incumbent Vice President: Andrew Johnson Other candidates President: Ulysses S. Grant Vice President: Benjamin Butler Daniel S. Dickinson Hannibal Hamlin incumbent Lovell Rousseau Democratic Party Convention Nominees President: George B. McClellan Vice President: George H. Pendleton Other candidates President: Thomas H. Seymour Vice President: George W. Cass Augustus C. Dodge Daniel W. Voorhees Other 1864 elections : House Senate v t e American Civil War Origins Origins Timeline leading to the War Bleeding Kansas Border states Compromise of 1850 John Browns raid on Harpers Ferry Kansas-Nebraska Act LincolnDouglas debates Missouri Compromise Nullification crisis Origins of the American Civil War Panic of 1857 Popular sovereignty Secession South Carolina Declaration of Secession States rights President Lincolns 75 000 volunteers Slavery African Americans Cornerstone Speech Crittenden Compromise Dred Scott v. Sandford Emancipation Proclamation Fire-Eaters Fugitive slave laws Plantations in the American South Positive good Slave Power Slavery in the United States Treatment of slaves in the United States Uncle Toms Cabin Abolitionism Abolitionism in the United States Susan B. Anthony James G. Birney John Brown Frederick Douglass William Lloyd Garrison Lane Debates on Slavery Elijah Parish Lovejoy J. Sella Martin Lysander Spooner George Luther Stearns Thaddeus Stevens Charles Sumner Caning Harriet Tubman Underground Railroad Combatants Theaters Campaigns Battles States Combatants Union Army Navy Marine Corps Revenue Cutter Service Confederacy Army Navy Marine Corps Theaters Eastern Western Lower Seaboard Trans-Mississippi Pacific Coast Union naval blockade Major campaigns Anaconda Plan Blockade runners New Mexico Jacksons Valley Peninsula Northern Virginia Maryland Stones River Vicksburg Tullahoma Gettysburg Morgans Raid Bristoe Knoxville Red River Overland Atlanta Valley 1864 Bermuda Hundred Richmond-Petersburg FranklinNashville Prices Missouri Expedition Shermans March Carolinas Mobile Appomattox Major battles Fort Sumter 1st Bull Run Wilsons Creek Fort Donelson Pea Ridge Hampton Roads Shiloh New Orleans Corinth Seven Pines Seven Days 2nd Bull Run Antietam Perryville Fredericksburg Stones River Chancellorsville Gettysburg Vicksburg Chickamauga Chattanooga Wilderness Fort Pillow Spotsylvania Cold Harbor Atlanta Crater Mobile Bay Franklin Nashville Five Forks Involvement States and territories Alabama Arkansas Arizona California Colorado Connecticut Dakota Territory District of Columbia Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indian Territory Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina Ohio Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Cities Atlanta Charleston Chattanooga New Orleans Richmond Washington D.C. Winchester Leaders Confederate Military R. H. Anderson Beauregard Bragg Buchanan Cooper Early Ewell Forrest Gorgas Hill Hood Jackson A. S. Johnston J. E. Johnston Lee Longstreet Morgan Mosby Polk Price Semmes E. K. Smith Stuart Taylor Wheeler Civilian Benjamin Bocock Breckinridge Davis Hunter Mallory Memminger Seddon Stephens Union Military Anderson Buell Burnside Butler Du Pont Farragut Foote Fremont Grant Halleck Hooker Hunt McClellan McDowell Meade Meigs Ord Pope D. D. Porter Rosecrans Scott Sheridan Sherman Thomas Civilian Adams Chase Ericsson Hamlin Lincoln Pinkerton Seward Stanton Stevens Wade Welles Aftermath Constitution Reconstruction Amendments 13th Amendment 14th Amendment 15th Amendment Reconstruction Alabama Claims BrooksBaxter War Carpetbaggers Colfax riot of 1873 Compromise of 1877 Confederate refugees Confederados Eufaula riot of 1874 Freedmens Bureau Freedmans Savings Bank Homestead Acts Southern Homestead Act of 1866 Timber Culture Act of 1873 Impeachment of Andrew Johnson trial efforts timeline first inquiry second inquiry impeachment managers investigation KirkHolden war Knights of the White Camelia Ku Klux Klan Ethnic violence Memphis riots of 1866 Meridian riot of 1871 New Orleans riot of 1866 Pulaski Tennessee riot of 1867 South Carolina riots of 1876 Reconstruction acts Habeas Corpus Act of 1867 Enforcement Act of 1870 Enforcement Act of February 1871 Enforcement Act of April 1871 Reconstruction era Reconstruction military districts Reconstruction Treaties Indian Council at Fort Smith Red Shirts Redeemers Scalawags South Carolina riots of 1876 Southern Claims Commission White League Post- Reconstruction Commemoration Centennial Civil War Discovery Trail Civil War Roundtables Civil War Trails Program Civil War Trust Confederate History Month Confederate Memorial Day Decoration Day Historical reenactment Robert E. Lee Day Confederate Memorial Hall Disenfranchisement Black Codes Jim Crow Historiographic issues Lost Cause mythology Modern display of the Confederate flag Red Shirts Sons of Confederate Veterans Sons of Union Veterans of the Civil War Southern Historical Society United Confederate Veterans United Daughters of the Confederacy Children of the Confederacy Wilmington insurrection of 1898 Monuments and memorials Union List Grand Army of the Republic memorials to Lincoln Confederate List artworks in Capitol memorials to Davis memorials to Lee Removal Cemeteries Ladies Memorial Associations U.S. national cemeteries Veterans 1913 Gettysburg reunion 1938 Gettysburg reunion Confederate Memorial Hall Confederate Veteran Grand Army of the Republic Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the U.S. Old soldiers homes Southern Cross of Honor United Confederate Veterans Related topics Military Arms Campaign Medal Cavalry Confederate Home Guard Confederate railroads Confederate revolving cannon Field artillery Medal of Honor recipients Medicine Naval battles Official Records Partisan rangers POW camps Rations Signal Corps Turning point Union corps badges U.S. Balloon Corps U.S. Home Guard U.S. Military Railroad Political Committee on the Conduct of the War Confederate States presidential election of 1861 Confiscation Act of 1861 Confiscation Act of 1862 Copperheads Diplomacy Emancipation Proclamation Habeas Corpus Act of 1863 Hampton Roads Conference National Union Party Politicians killed Radical Republicans Trent Affair Union Leagues U.S. Presidential Election of 1864 War Democrats Music Battle Hymn of the Republic Dixie John Browns Body A Lincoln Portrait Marching Through Georgia Maryland My Maryland When Johnny Comes Marching Home Daar kom die Alibama By ethnicity African Americans German Americans Irish Americans Italian Americans Native Americans Catawba Cherokee Choctaw Seminole Other topics Baltimore riot of 1861 Battlefield preservation Bibliography Confederate war finance Confederate States dollar Espionage Confederate Secret Service Great Revival of 1863 Gender issues Juneteenth Naming the war New York City Gold Hoax of 1864 New York City riots of 1863 Photographers Richmond riots of 1863 Salt Supreme Court cases Tokens U.S. Sanitary Commission Women soldiers Related List of films and television shows about the American Civil War Category Portal v t e Reconstruction era Participants Federal government Presidents Abraham Lincoln Andrew Johnson Ulysses S. Grant Rutherford B. Hayes Congress 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 Radical Republicans Moderate Republicans Conservative Republicans African-American senators African-American representatives Reconstruction Amendments United States Congressional Joint Committee on Reconstruction United States House Select Committee on Reconstruction Federal judiciary Taney Court Chase Court Waite Court Federal bureaucracy Edwin Stanton Freedmens Bureau Justice Department State governments Southern United States Confederate States of America Others African Americans Free people of color Freedman Politicians Carpetbaggers Ku Klux Klan Scalawag Redeemers White League Red Shirts Democratic Party Bourbon Democrat Horatio Seymour Samuel J. Tilden Republican Party Stalwarts Charles Sumner Thaddeus Stevens Lyman Trumbull Benjamin Wade John Bingham James Mitchell Ashley Freedmans Savings Bank Women during the Reconstruction era Elections Presidential 1864 DNC National Union Convention Radical Democracy Party 1868 DNC RNC 1872 DNC RNC Liberal Republican Party Straight-Out Democratic Party Victoria Woodhull 1876 DNC RNC Greenback Convention Prohibition Convention Electoral Commission Compromise of 1877 U.S. Senate 186465 186667 186869 187071 187273 187475 187677 U.S. House 186465 186667 186869 187071 187273 187475 187677 Gubernatorial 1863 AL CA CT KY MA MN NH OH PA VA VT WI WV 1864 CT IL IN LA MD MA MI MO NH VT WV 1865 CT FL LA MA MN NJ OH SC VT WI 1866 CT DE MA ME MI NC OR PA TX VT WV 1867 CA CT MA MD ME MN OH VT WI 1868 AL CT FL IL IN LA MA ME MI MO NC NJ SC VT WV 1869 CT IA MA ME MN MS OH PA RI VA VT WI 1870 AL CT DE MA ME MI MO OR RI SC VT WV 1871 CA CT IA KY MA MD ME MN NJ OH RI WI 1872 AL CT FL IL IN LA MA ME MI MO NC PA RI SC VT WV 1873 CT IA MA ME MN MS OH TX VA WI 1874 AL CT DE KS MA ME MI MO NJ NV OR SC VT 1875 CA CT IA KY MA MD ME MN OH OH WI 1876 AL CO CT Apr. CT Nov. FL IL IN KS LA MA ME MI MO NC RI SC VT WV U.S. elections 1864 1866 1868 1870 1872 1874 1876 Key events Prelude American Indian Wars Slavery in the United States A Vindication of the Rights of Woman 1792 The Equality of the Sexes and the Condition of Women 1838 Woman in the Nineteenth Century 1839 Seneca Falls Convention 1848 National Womens Rights Convention 1850 American Civil War Confiscation Act of 1861 Confiscation Act of 1862 District of Columbia Compensated Emancipation Act 1862 Militia Act of 1862 1863 Emancipation Proclamation General Order No. 143 Lincolns presidential Reconstruction Ten percent plan National Bank Act Womens Loyal National League New York City draft riots 1863 State of the Union Address 1864 WadeDavis Bill 1864 elections 1864 State of the Union Address 1865 13th Amendment Second inauguration of Abraham Lincoln Address Black Codes Special Field Orders No. 15 Freedmens Bureau Freedmens Bureau bills Confederates surrender at Appomattox Assassination of Abraham Lincoln Shaw University New Departure 1865 State of the Union Address Founding of the Ku Klux Klan 1866 Civil Rights Act of 1866 Memphis massacre of 1866 New Orleans Massacre of 1866 Swing Around the Circle Southern Homestead Act of 1866 Fort Smith Conference and Cherokee Reconstruction Treaty of 1866 Choctaw and Chickasaw Treaty of Washington of 1866 Tennessee readmitted to Union Petition for Universal Freedom National Labor Union Ex parte Garland Ex parte Milligan Slave Kidnapping Act of 1866 1866 elections 1867 Tenure of Office Act Command of Army Act Indian Peace Commission Knights of the White Camelia Pulaski riot Reconstruction Acts Reconstruction military districts Constitutional conventions of 1867 Habeas Corpus Act of 1867 Peonage Act of 1867 First impeachment inquiry into Andrew Johnson 1867 State of the Union Address 1868 14th Amendment Second impeachment inquiry into Andrew Johnson Impeachment of Andrew Johnson Timeline Impeachment trial of Andrew Johnson Impeachment managers investigation Articles of impeachment Arkansas readmitted to Union Florida readmitted to Union North Carolina readmitted to Union South Carolina readmitted to Union Louisiana readmitted to Union Alabama readmitted to Union Opelousas massacre Fourth Reconstruction Act Georgia v. Stanton 1868 elections 1868 State of the Union Address 1869 National Woman Suffrage Association American Woman Suffrage Association Alabama Claims Proposed annexation of Santo Domingo Board of Indian Commissioners Public Credit Act of 1869 Black Friday 1869 Ex parte McCardle First transcontinental railroad 1869 State of the Union Address 1870 15th Amendment Enforcement Act of 1870 Justice Department Naturalization Act of 1870 KirkHolden war Shoffner Act 1870 elections 1870 State of the Union Address 1871 Ku Klux Klan hearings Second Enforcement Act Ku Klux Klan Act Alcorn State University Meridian race riot of 1871 Treaty of Washington New York custom house ring Civil service commission United States expedition to Korea 1871 State of the Union Address 1872 General Mining Act of 1872 Credit Mobilier scandal Modoc War Star Route scandal Salary Grab Act Amnesty Act 1872 elections 1872 State of the Union Address 1873 Panic of 1873 Colfax massacre Timber Culture Act Slaughter-House Cases Virginius Affair Coinage Act of 1873 Long Depression Comstock laws 1873 State of the Union Address 1874 BrooksBaxter War Battle of Liberty Place Coushatta massacre Red River War Timber Culture Act White League Election Massacre of 1874 Vicksburg massacre Black Hills Gold Rush Sanborn incident Anti-Moiety Acts 1874 elections 1874 State of the Union Address 1875 United States v. Cruikshank Civil Rights Act of 1875 Red Shirts Mississippi Plan Clifton Riot of 1875 Yazoo City Riot of 1875 Specie Payment Resumption Act Whiskey Ring Wheeler Compromise Delano affair Pratt Boyd 1875 State of the Union Address 1876 Hamburg massacre South Carolina civil disturbances of 1876 Ellenton massacre Great Sioux War of 1876 Battle of the Little Bighorn United States v. Reese Trader post scandal Centennial Exposition Cattellism Safe burglary conspiracy 1876 elections 1876 State of the Union Address 1877 Electoral Commission Compromise of 1877 Nez Perce War Desert Land Act Great Railroad Strike of 1877 Aftermath Posse Comitatus Act 1878 Civil Rights Cases 1883 United States v. Harris 1883 Plessy v. Ferguson 1896 Williams v. Mississippi 1898 Wilmington insurrection of 1898 Giles v. Harris 1903 Disenfranchisement Aspects Historiography Bibliography of the Reconstruction era James Shepherd Pike The Prostrate State 1874 James Bryce The American Commonwealth 1888 Claude G. Bowers The Tragic Era 1929 Columbia University John Burgess Walter Lynwood Fleming Dunning School William Archibald Dunning Charles A. Beard Howard K. Beale W. E. B. Du Bois Black Reconstruction in America 1935 C. Vann Woodward Joel Williamson William R. Brock The American Crisis 1963 John Hope Franklin From Slavery to Freedom 1947 After Slavery 1965 Leon Litwack Been in the Storm So Long 1979 Eric Foner Reconstruction: Americas Unfinished Revolution 18631877 1988 Kenneth M. Stampp Steven Hahn A Nation Under Our Feet 2003 The Second Founding: How the Civil War and Reconstruction Remade the Constitution 2019 Memory Winslow Homer A Visit from the Old Mistress 1876 Thomas Dixon Jr. The Leopards Spots 1902 The Clansman: A Historical Romance of the Ku Klux Klan 1905 D. W. Griffith The Birth of a Nation 1915 United Daughters of the Confederacy Gone with the Wind 1939 David W. Blight Race and Reunion 2001 Legacy Womens suffrage in the United States Labor history of the United States Gilded Age Jim Crow era Civil rights movement American frontier Other topics African American founding fathers of the United States Forty acres and a mule Habeas corpus History of the United States 18651917 Paramilitary Race human categorization Reconstruction Treaties Suffrage Technological and industrial history of the United States White supremacy Whitecapping Category v t e Individuals lain in state in honor and in repose in the United States State funerals in the United States Lain in state US Capitol rotunda Clay 1852 Lincoln 1865 funeral Stevens 1868 Sumner 1874 Wilson 1875 Garfield 1881 Logan 1886 McKinley 1901 LEnfant 1909 Dewey 1917 Unknown Soldier for World War I 1921 Harding 1923 W. H. Taft 1930 Pershing 1948 R. A. Taft 1953 Unknown Soldiers for World War II and the Korean War 1958 Kennedy 1963 funeral MacArthur 1964 H. Hoover 1964 Eisenhower 1969 Dirksen 1969 J. E. Hoover 1972 Johnson 1973 Humphrey 1978 Blassie Unknown Soldier for the Vietnam War 1984 Pepper 1989 Reagan 2004 funeral Ford 200607 funeral Inouye 2012 McCain 2018 Bush 2018 funeral Lewis 2020 Dole 2021 Reid 2022 National Statuary Hall Cummings 2019 Ginsburg 2020 funeral Young 2022 House Chamber Hooper 1875 Herbert C. Hoover Building Brown 1996 Old Senate Chamber Chase 1873 Lain in honor US Capitol rotunda Chestnut and Gibson 1998 Parks 2005 Graham 2018 Sicknick 2021 Evans 2021 Williams 2022 Lain in repose East Room Harrison 1841 Taylor 1850 Lincoln 1865 funeral McKinley 1901 Harding 1923 Roosevelt 1945 Kennedy 1963 funeral Great Hall of the US Supreme Court Warren 1974 Marshall 1993 Burger 1995 Brennan 1997 Blackmun 1999 Rehnquist 2005 Scalia 2016 Stevens 2019 Ginsburg 2020 funeral OConnor 2023 Senate Chamber Byrd 2010 Lautenberg 2013 Bold : Presidents and chief justices v t e Appalachia People of the Appalachian Mountains in the Eastern United States Ethnic groups Black-Dutch Cherokee Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians Chestnut Ridge people Melungeon Scotch-Irish formerly Kanawha Valley people Koasati Shawnee and Yuchi History Battle of Blair Mountain Coal Creek War Coal strike of 1902 FrenchEversole feud HatfieldMcCoy feud Battle of the Grapevine Creek Lincoln County feud Hillbilly Highway Baltimore Chicago Detroit Kentucky County Virginia Overmountain Men Paint CreekCabin Creek strike of 1912 Southwest Territory Trans-Appalachia Wilderness Road West Virginia coal wars 1920 Alabama coal strike Society Appalachia Social and economic stratification in Appalachia Appalachian Americans Childbirth in rural Appalachia Settlement school Urban Appalachians Culture Appalachian English Appalachian folk art Affrilachia Cuisine apple butter chicken fried steak chow-chow country ham Goo Goo Clusters Shucky beans sorghum syrup soup beans Traditional music Appalachian music Appalachian dulcimer Blackberry Blossom tune Bluegrass fiddle Bluegrass music Clogging Cripple Creek folk song Cumberland Gap folk song East Tennessee Blues Hootenanny In the Pines Nottamun Town Shady Grove song Tom Dooley song Historical individuals Francis Asbury Daniel Boone Davy Crockett John Gordon militia captain Devil Anse Hatfield Abraham Lincoln Belle Starr In popular culture Appalachian stereotypes Appalachian studies Deliverance Hillbilly Moonshine in popular culture Mountain white Poor White Redneck Redneck joke The Hatfields and the McCoys Part of a series on hill people around the world v t e Mount Rushmore Shrine of Democracy Construction Gutzon Borglum sculptor Lincoln Borglum assistant sculptor Luigi Del Bianco chief carver Walter K. Long assisted Doane Robinson conceived idea Peter Norbeck political promoter Norbeck-Williamson Act of 1929 Subjects George Washington Thomas Jefferson Theodore Roosevelt Abraham Lincoln Museum Lincoln Borglum Museum Location Black Hills of South Dakota Legacy In popular culture Mount Rushmore Anniversary coins National symbols of the United States Related Charles E. Rushmore namesake 2020 fireworks celebration Mount Rushmore Syndrome USS Rushmore LSD-14 USS Rushmore LSD-47 Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat 2 National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Russia Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Taiwan Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Korea Sweden Poland 2 Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz KulturNav Discography of American Historical Recordings People Netherlands US Congress Trove Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef NARA SNAC Te Papa New Zealand RISM Retrieved from https:en.wikipedia.orgwindex.php?titleAbrahamLincolnoldid1250760833 Categories : Abraham Lincoln 1809 births 1865 deaths 1865 murders in the United States Politicians assassinated in the 1860s National presidents assassinated in the 19th century 19th-century presidents of the United States American abolitionists People of the American colonization movement American lawyers admitted to the practice of law by reading law American military personnel of the Indian Wars American militia officers American nationalists American political party founders Illinois postmasters American surveyors American people of English descent Assassinated presidents of the United States Burials at Oak Ridge Cemetery Candidates in the 1860 United States presidential election Candidates in the 1864 United States presidential election Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees Harrison family of Virginia Illinois Central Railroad people Illinois Republicans Illinois lawyers Lincoln family Members of the Illinois House of Representatives People associated with the assassination of Abraham Lincoln People from Coles County Illinois People from LaRue County Kentucky People from Macon County Illinois People from Spencer County Indiana People murdered in Washington D.C. People of Illinois in the American Civil War People with mood disorders Politicians from Springfield Illinois Presidents of the United States Republican Party United States presidential nominees Republican Party presidents of the United States Union American Civil War political leaders Whig Party members of the United States House of Representatives from Illinois Deaths by firearm in Washington D.C. Politicians killed in the American Civil War 19th-century Illinois politicians Progressive conservatism Hidden categories: CS1 Russian-language sources ru Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Good articles Use American English from July 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from July 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2024 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from February 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 12 October 2024 at 10:48 UTC . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view