Adolf Hitler - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Donate Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 1 Ancestry 2 Early years Toggle Early years subsection 2.1 Childhood and education 2.2 Early adulthood in Vienna and Munich 2.3 World War I 3 Entry into politics Toggle Entry into politics subsection 3.1 Beer Hall Putsch and Landsberg Prison 3.2 Rebuilding the Nazi Party 4 Rise to power Toggle Rise to power subsection 4.1 Bruning administration 4.2 Appointment as chancellor 4.3 Reichstag fire and March elections 4.4 Day of Potsdam and the Enabling Act 4.5 Dictatorship 5 Nazi Germany Toggle Nazi Germany subsection 5.1 Economy and culture 5.2 Rearmament and new alliances 6 World War II Toggle World War II subsection 6.1 Early diplomatic successes 6.1.1 Alliance with Japan 6.1.2 Austria and Czechoslovakia 6.2 Start of World War II 6.3 Path to defeat 6.4 Defeat and death 7 The Holocaust 8 Leadership style 9 Personal life Toggle Personal life subsection 9.1 Family 9.2 Views on religion 9.3 Health 10 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 10.1 In propaganda 11 See also 12 Notes 13 Citations 14 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 14.1 Printed 14.2 Online 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Adolf Hitler 238 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch nglisc Aragones Armaneashti Asturianu Avanee Azrbaycanca Basa Bali Banjar Ban-lam-gu Basa Banyumasan Bikol Central Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Catala Cebuano Cestina Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa ChiShona ChiTumbuka Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Davvisamegiella Deutsch Dine bizaad Eesti Emilian e rumagnol Espanol Esperanto Estremenu Euskara Fiji Hindi Froyskt Francais Frysk Fulfulde Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gaidhlig Galego Goychi Konknni Gungbe Hak-ka-ngi Hausa Hawaii Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue inuktitut Islenska Italiano Jawa Kaby Kaszebsczi Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Kiswahili Kreyol ayisyen Kriyol gwiyannen Kurdi Ladin Ladino Latgalu Latina Latviesu Letzebuergesch Lietuviu Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala La .lojban. Luganda Lombard Magyar Malagasy Malti Maori Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Ming-deng-ngu Mirandes Nahuatl Nederlands Nedersaksies Napulitano Nordfriisk Norsk bokmal Norsk nynorsk Novial Occitan Oromoo Ozbekcha Pangasinan Papiamentu Patois Picard Piemonteis Plattduutsch Polski Portugues Qaraqalpaqsha Qrmtatarca Ripoarisch Romana Romani chib Rumantsch Runa Simi Sakizaya Sardu Scots Seeltersk Sesotho Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovencina Slovenscina Slunski Soomaaliga Sranantongo srpski Srpskohrvatski Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog Taqbaylit Tarandine tatarca Thuja Lea faka-Tonga Turkce Vahcuengh Veneto Vepsan kel Tieng Viet Volapuk Voro Walon West-Vlams Winaray Yoruba Zazaki Zeeuws Zemaiteska Betawi Batak Mandailing Tolsi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Dictator of Nazi Germany from 1933 to 1945 Hitler and The Fuhrer redirect here. For other uses see Hitler disambiguation and Fuhrer disambiguation . Adolf Hitler Official portrait 1938 Fuhrer of Germany In office 2 August 1934 30 April 1945 Preceded by Paul von Hindenburg as President Succeeded by Karl Donitz as President Chancellor of Germany In office 30 January 1933 30 April 1945 President Paul von Hindenburg 19331934 Vice Chancellor Franz von Papen 19331934 Preceded by Kurt von Schleicher Succeeded by Joseph Goebbels Fuhrer of the Nazi Party In office 29 July 1921 30 April 1945 Deputy Rudolf Hess 19331941 Preceded by Anton Drexler Party Chairman Succeeded by Martin Bormann Party Minister Personal details Born 1889-04-20 20 April 1889 Braunau am Inn Austria-Hungary Died 30 April 1945 1945-04-30 aged 56 Berlin Nazi Germany Cause of death Suicide by gunshot Citizenship Austria until 1925 Stateless 19251932 Germany from 1932 Political party Nazi Party from 1920 Other political affiliations German Workers Party 19191920 Spouse Eva Braun m. 1945 ; died 1945 Parents Alois Hitler Klara Polzl Relatives Hitler family Cabinet Hitler cabinet Signature Military service Allegiance German Empire Weimar Republic Nazi Germany Branch Imperial German Army Bavarian Army Reichswehr Years of service 19141920 Rank Gefreiter Commands German Army from 1941 Army Group A 1942 Wars World War I Western Front First Battle of Ypres Battle of the Somme WIA Battle of Arras Battle of Passchendaele World War II Awards List of awards Adolf Hitlers voice Hitlers last recorded speech Recorded January 1945 This article is part of a series about Adolf Hitler Rise to power Beer Hall Putsch Reichstag fire Enabling Act of 1933 Fuhrer of Germany Nazi Germany Hitler cabinet Economy German rearmament World War II Anschluss Occupation of Czechoslovakia Western Front Eastern Front Death assassination attempts and conspiracy theories Last will and testament Crimes against humanity Nuremberg Laws The Holocaust Final Solution Electoral campaigns 1930 March 1932 July 1932 November 1932 March 1933 November 1933 Views Political Religious Personal Family Military career Health Psychopathography Sexuality Wealth and income Works Paintings Mein Kampf Hitlers Zweites Buch Speeches Bibliography v t e Adolf Hitler a 20 April 1889 30 April 1945 was an Austrian-born German politician who was the dictator of Nazi Germany from 1933 until his suicide in 1945. He rose to power as the leader of the Nazi Party c becoming the chancellor in 1933 and then taking the title of Fuhrer und Reichskanzler in 1934. d His invasion of Poland on 1 September 1939 marked the start of the Second World War . He was closely involved in military operations throughout the war and was central to the perpetration of the Holocaust : the genocide of about six million Jews and millions of other victims . Hitler was born in Braunau am Inn in Austria-Hungary and was raised near Linz . He lived in Vienna in the first decade of the 1900s before moving to Germany in 1913. He was decorated during his service in the German Army in World War I receiving the Iron Cross . In 1919 he joined the German Workers Party DAP the precursor of the Nazi Party and in 1921 was appointed leader of the Nazi Party. In 1923 he attempted to seize governmental power in a failed coup in Munich and was sentenced to five years in prison serving just over a year of his sentence. While there he dictated the first volume of his autobiography and political manifesto Mein Kampf My Struggle . After his early release in 1924 Hitler gained popular support by attacking the Treaty of Versailles and promoting pan-Germanism antisemitism and anti-communism with charismatic oratory and Nazi propaganda . He frequently denounced communism as being part of an international Jewish conspiracy . By November 1932 the Nazi Party held the most seats in the Reichstag but not a majority. No political parties were able to form a majority coalition in support of a candidate for chancellor. Former chancellor Franz von Papen and other conservative leaders convinced President Paul von Hindenburg to appoint Hitler as chancellor on 30 January 1933. Shortly thereafter the Reichstag passed the Enabling Act of 1933 which began the process of transforming the Weimar Republic into Nazi Germany a one-party dictatorship based on the totalitarian and autocratic ideology of Nazism . Upon Hindenburgs death on 2 August 1934 Hitler succeeded him becoming simultaneously the head of state and government with absolute power. Domestically Hitler implemented numerous racist policies and sought to deport or kill German Jews . His first six years in power resulted in rapid economic recovery from the Great Depression the abrogation of restrictions imposed on Germany after World War I and the annexation of territories inhabited by millions of ethnic Germans which initially gave him significant popular support. One of Hitlers key goals was Lebensraum lit. living space for the German people in Eastern Europe and his aggressive expansionist foreign policy is considered the primary cause of World War II in Europe . He directed large-scale rearmament and on 1 September 1939 invaded Poland causing Britain and France to declare war on Germany . In June 1941 Hitler ordered an invasion of the Soviet Union . In December 1941 he declared war on the United States . By the end of 1941 German forces and the European Axis powers occupied most of Europe and North Africa . These gains were gradually reversed after 1941 and in 1945 the Allied armies defeated the German army. On 29 April 1945 he married his longtime partner Eva Braun in the Fuhrerbunker in Berlin. The couple committed suicide the next day to avoid capture by the Soviet Red Army . In accordance with Hitlers wishes their corpses were burned. The historian and biographer Ian Kershaw described Hitler as the embodiment of modern political evil . 3 Under Hitlers leadership and racist ideology the Nazi regime was responsible for the genocide of an estimated six million Jews and millions of other victims whom he and his followers deemed Untermenschen subhumans or socially undesirable. Hitler and the Nazi regime were also responsible for the deliberate killing of an estimated 19.3 million civilians and prisoners of war. In addition 28.7 million soldiers and civilians died as a result of military action in the European theatre . The number of civilians killed during World War II was unprecedented in warfare and the casualties constitute the deadliest conflict in history . Ancestry See also: Hitler family Hitlers father Alois Hitler 18371903 was the illegitimate child of Maria Schicklgruber . 4 The baptismal register did not show the name of his father and Alois initially bore his mothers surname Schicklgruber . In 1842 Johann Georg Hiedler married Aloiss mother. Alois was brought up in the family of Hiedlers brother Johann Nepomuk Hiedler . 5 In 1876 Alois was made legitimate and his baptismal record annotated by a priest to register Johann Georg Hiedler as Aloiss father recorded as Georg Hitler . 6 7 Alois then assumed the surname Hitler 7 also spelled Hiedler Huttler or Huettler . The name is probably based on the German word Hutte lit. hut and has the meaning one who lives in a hut . 8 Nazi official Hans Frank suggested that Aloiss mother had been employed as a housekeeper by a Jewish family in Graz and that the familys 19-year-old son Leopold Frankenberger had fathered Alois a claim that came to be known as the Frankenberger thesis . 9 No Frankenberger was registered in Graz during that period no record has been produced of Leopold Frankenbergers existence 10 so historians dismiss the claim that Aloiss father was Jewish. 11 12 Early years Childhood and education Adolf Hitler was born on 20 April 1889 in Braunau am Inn a town in Austria-Hungary present-day Austria close to the border with the German Empire . 13 14 He was the fourth of six children born to Alois Hitler and his third wife Klara Polzl . Three of Hitlers siblingsGustav Ida and Ottodied in infancy. 15 Also living in the household were Aloiss children from his second marriage: Alois Jr. born 1882 and Angela born 1883. 16 When Hitler was three the family moved to Passau Germany. 17 There he acquired the distinctive lower Bavarian dialect rather than Austrian German which marked his speech throughout his life. 18 19 20 The family returned to Austria and settled in Leonding in 1894 and in June 1895 Alois retired to Hafeld near Lambach where he farmed and kept bees. Hitler attended Volksschule a state-funded primary school in nearby Fischlham . 21 22 Hitler as an infant c. 188990 The move to Hafeld coincided with the onset of intense father-son conflicts caused by Hitlers refusal to conform to the strict discipline of his school. 23 Alois tried to browbeat his son into obedience while Adolf did his best to be the opposite of whatever his father wanted. 24 Alois would also beat his son although his mother tried to protect him from regular beatings. 25 Alois Hitlers farming efforts at Hafeld ended in failure and in 1897 the family moved to Lambach. The eight-year-old Hitler took singing lessons sang in the church choir and even considered becoming a priest. 26 In 1898 the family returned permanently to Leonding. Hitler was deeply affected by the death of his younger brother Edmund in 1900 from measles . Hitler changed from a confident outgoing conscientious student to a morose detached boy who constantly fought with his father and teachers. 27 Paula Hitler recalled how Adolf was a teenage bully who would often slap her. 25 Alois had made a successful career in the customs bureau and wanted his son to follow in his footsteps. 28 Hitler later dramatised an episode from this period when his father took him to visit a customs office depicting it as an event that gave rise to an unforgiving antagonism between father and son who were both strong-willed. 29 30 31 Ignoring his sons desire to attend a classical high school and become an artist Alois sent Hitler to the Realschule in Linz in September 1900. e 32 Hitler rebelled against this decision and in Mein Kampf states that he intentionally performed poorly in school hoping that once his father saw what little progress I was making at the technical school he would let me devote myself to my dream . 33 Hitlers father Alois c. 1900 Hitlers mother Klara 1870s Like many Austrian Germans Hitler began to develop German nationalist ideas from a young age. 34 He expressed loyalty only to Germany despising the declining Habsburg monarchy and its rule over an ethnically diverse empire. 35 36 Hitler and his friends used the greeting Heil and sang the Deutschlandlied instead of the Austrian Imperial anthem . 37 After Aloiss sudden death on 3 January 1903 Hitlers performance at school deteriorated and his mother allowed him to leave. 38 He enrolled at the Realschule in Steyr in September 1904 where his behaviour and performance improved. 39 In 1905 after passing a repeat of the final exam Hitler left the school without any ambitions for further education or clear plans for a career. 40 Early adulthood in Vienna and Munich See also: Paintings by Adolf Hitler The house in Leonding Austria where Hitler spent his early adolescence The Alter Hof in Munich a watercolour painting by Hitler in 1914 In 1907 Hitler left Linz to live and study fine art in Vienna financed by orphans benefits and support from his mother. He applied for admission to the Academy of Fine Arts Vienna but was rejected twice. 41 42 The director suggested Hitler should apply to the School of Architecture but he lacked the necessary academic credentials because he had not finished secondary school. 43 On 21 December 1907 his mother died of breast cancer at the age of 47; Hitler was 18 at the time. In 1909 Hitler ran out of money and was forced to live a bohemian life in homeless shelters and a mens dormitory . 44 45 He earned money as a casual labourer and by painting and selling watercolours of Viennas sights. 41 During his time in Vienna he pursued a growing passion for architecture and music attending ten performances of Lohengrin his favourite Wagner opera. 46 In Vienna Hitler was first exposed to racist rhetoric. 47 Populists such as mayor Karl Lueger exploited the citys prevalent anti-Semitic sentiment occasionally also espousing German nationalist notions for political benefit. German nationalism was even more widespread in the Mariahilf district where Hitler then lived. 48 Georg Ritter von Schonerer became a major influence on Hitler 49 and he developed an admiration for Martin Luther . 50 Hitler read local newspapers that promoted prejudice and utilised Christian fears of being swamped by an influx of Eastern European Jews 51 as well as pamphlets that published the thoughts of philosophers and theoreticians such as Houston Stewart Chamberlain Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche Gustave Le Bon and Arthur Schopenhauer . 52 During his life in Vienna Hitler also developed fervent anti-Slavic sentiments . 53 54 The origin and development of Hitlers anti-Semitism remains a matter of debate. 55 His friend August Kubizek claimed that Hitler was a confirmed anti-Semite before he left Linz. 56 However historian Brigitte Hamann describes Kubizeks claim as problematical . 57 While Hitler states in Mein Kampf that he first became an anti-Semite in Vienna 58 Reinhold Hanisch who helped him sell his paintings disagrees. Hitler had dealings with Jews while living in Vienna. 59 60 61 Historian Richard J. Evans states that historians now generally agree that his notorious murderous anti-Semitism emerged well after Germanys defeat in World War I as a product of the paranoid stab-in-the-back explanation for the catastrophe . 62 Hitler received the final part of his fathers estate in May 1913 and moved to Munich Germany. 63 When he was conscripted into the Austro-Hungarian Army 64 he journeyed to Salzburg on 5 February 1914 for medical assessment. After he was deemed unfit for service he returned to Munich. 65 Hitler later claimed that he did not wish to serve the Habsburg Empire because of the mixture of races in its army and his belief that the collapse of Austria-Hungary was imminent. 66 World War I Main article: Military career of Adolf Hitler Hitler far right seated with Bavarian Army comrades from the Bavarian Reserve Infantry Regiment 16 c. 191418 In August 1914 at the outbreak of World War I Hitler was living in Munich and voluntarily enlisted in the Bavarian Army . 67 According to a 1924 report by the Bavarian authorities allowing Hitler to serve was most likely an administrative error because as an Austrian citizen he should have been returned to Austria. 67 Posted to the Bavarian Reserve Infantry Regiment 16 1st Company of the List Regiment 67 68 he served as a dispatch runner on the Western Front in France and Belgium 69 spending nearly half his time at the regimental headquarters in Fournes-en-Weppes well behind the front lines. 70 71 In 1914 he was present at the First Battle of Ypres 72 and in that year was decorated for bravery receiving the Iron Cross Second Class. 72 During his service at headquarters Hitler pursued his artwork drawing cartoons and instructions for an army newspaper. During the Battle of the Somme in October 1916 he was wounded in the left thigh when a shell exploded in the dispatch runners dugout. 72 73 Hitler spent almost two months recovering in hospital at Beelitz returning to his regiment on 5 March 1917. 74 He was present at the Battle of Arras of 1917 and the Battle of Passchendaele . 72 He received the Black Wound Badge on 18 May 1918. 75 Three months later in August 1918 on a recommendation by Lieutenant Hugo Gutmann his Jewish superior Hitler received the Iron Cross First Class a decoration rarely awarded at Hitlers Gefreiter rank. 76 77 On 15 October 1918 he was temporarily blinded in a mustard gas attack and was hospitalised in Pasewalk . 78 While there Hitler learned of Germanys defeat and by his own account suffered a second bout of blindness after receiving this news. 79 Hitler described his role in World War I as the greatest of all experiences and was praised by his commanding officers for his bravery. 80 His wartime experience reinforced his German patriotism and he was shocked by Germanys capitulation in November 1918. 81 His displeasure with the collapse of the war effort began to shape his ideology. 82 Like other German nationalists he believed the Dolchstolegende stab-in-the-back myth which claimed that the German army undefeated in the field had been stabbed in the back on the home front by civilian leaders Jews Marxists and those who signed the armistice that ended the fightinglater dubbed the November criminals . 83 The Treaty of Versailles stipulated that Germany had to relinquish several of its territories and demilitarise the Rhineland . The treaty imposed economic sanctions and levied heavy reparations on the country. Many Germans saw the treaty as an unjust humiliation. They especially objected to Article 231 which they interpreted as declaring Germany responsible for the war. 84 The Versailles Treaty and the economic social and political conditions in Germany after the war were later exploited by Hitler for political gain. 85 Entry into politics Main article: Political views of Adolf Hitler Hitlers German Workers Party DAP membership card After World War I Hitler returned to Munich. 86 Without formal education or career prospects he remained in the Army. 87 In July 1919 he was appointed Verbindungsmann intelligence agent of an Aufklarungskommando reconnaissance unit of the Reichswehr assigned to influence other soldiers and to infiltrate the German Workers Party DAP. At a DAP meeting on 12 September 1919 Party Chairman Anton Drexler was impressed by Hitlers oratorical skills. He gave him a copy of his pamphlet My Political Awakening which contained anti-Semitic nationalist anti-capitalist and anti-Marxist ideas. 88 On the orders of his army superiors Hitler applied to join the party 89 and within a week was accepted as party member 555 the party began counting membership at 500 to give the impression they were a much larger party. 90 91 Hitler made his earliest known written statement about the Jewish question in a 16 September 1919 letter to Adolf Gemlich now known as the Gemlich letter . In the letter Hitler argues that the aim of the government must unshakably be the removal of the Jews altogether . 92 At the DAP Hitler met Dietrich Eckart one of the partys founders and a member of the occult Thule Society . 93 Eckart became Hitlers mentor exchanging ideas with him and introducing him to a wide range of Munich society. 94 To increase its appeal the DAP changed its name to the Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei National Socialist German Workers Party NSDAP now known as the Nazi Party . 95 Hitler designed the partys banner of a swastika in a white circle on a red background. 96 Hitler was discharged from the Army on 31 March 1920 and began working full-time for the party. 97 The party headquarters was in Munich a centre for anti-government German nationalists determined to eliminate Marxism and undermine the Weimar Republic . 98 In February 1921already highly effective at crowd manipulation he spoke to a crowd of over 6 000. 99 To publicise the meeting two truckloads of party supporters drove around Munich waving swastika flags and distributing leaflets. Hitler soon gained notoriety for his rowdy polemic speeches against the Treaty of Versailles rival politicians and especially against Marxists and Jews. 100 Hitler poses for the camera in September 1930 In June 1921 while Hitler and Eckart were on a fundraising trip to Berlin a mutiny broke out within the Nazi Party in Munich. Members of its executive committee wanted to merge with the Nuremberg-based German Socialist Party DSP. 101 Hitler returned to Munich on 11 July and angrily tendered his resignation. The committee members realised that the resignation of their leading public figure and speaker would mean the end of the party. 102 Hitler announced he would rejoin on the condition that he would replace Drexler as party chairman and that the party headquarters would remain in Munich. 103 The committee agreed and he rejoined the party on 26 July as member 3 680. Hitler continued to face some opposition within the Nazi Party. Opponents of Hitler in the leadership had Hermann Esser expelled from the party and they printed 3 000 copies of a pamphlet attacking Hitler as a traitor to the party. 103 f In the following days Hitler spoke to several large audiences and defended himself and Esser to thunderous applause. His strategy proved successful and at a special party congress on 29 July he was granted absolute power as party chairman succeeding Drexler by a vote of 533 to 1. 104 Hitlers vitriolic beer hall speeches began attracting regular audiences. A demagogue 105 he became adept at using populist themes including the use of scapegoats who were blamed for his listeners economic hardships. 106 107 108 Hitler used personal magnetism and an understanding of crowd psychology to his advantage while engaged in public speaking. 109 110 Historians have noted the hypnotic effect of his rhetoric on large audiences and of his eyes in small groups. 111 Alfons Heck a former member of the Hitler Youth recalled: We erupted into a frenzy of nationalistic pride that bordered on hysteria. For minutes on end we shouted at the top of our lungs with tears streaming down our faces: Sieg Heil Sieg Heil Sieg Heil! From that moment on I belonged to Adolf Hitler body and soul. 112 Early followers included Rudolf Hess former air force ace Hermann Goring and army captain Ernst Rohm . Rohm became head of the Nazis paramilitary organisation the Sturmabteilung SA Stormtroopers which protected meetings and attacked political opponents. A critical influence on Hitlers thinking during this period was the Aufbau Vereinigung 113 a conspiratorial group of White Russian exiles and early Nazis. The group financed with funds channelled from wealthy industrialists introduced Hitler to the idea of a Jewish conspiracy linking international finance with Bolshevism . 114 The programme of the Nazi Party was laid out in their 25-point programme on 24 February 1920. This did not represent a coherent ideology but was a conglomeration of received ideas which had currency in the volkisch Pan-Germanic movement such as ultranationalism opposition to the Treaty of Versailles distrust of capitalism as well as some socialist ideas. For Hitler the most important aspect of it was its strong anti-Semitic stance. He also perceived the programme as primarily a basis for propaganda and for attracting people to the party. 115 Beer Hall Putsch and Landsberg Prison Main article: Beer Hall Putsch Defendants in the Beer Hall Putsch trial 1 April 1924. From left to right: Heinz Pernet Friedrich Weber Wilhelm Frick Hermann Kriebel Erich Ludendorff Hitler Wilhelm Bruckner Ernst Rohm and Robert Wagner . The dust jacket of Mein Kampf s 192628 edition which Hitler authored in 1925 In 1923 Hitler enlisted the help of World War I General Erich Ludendorff for an attempted coup known as the Beer Hall Putsch . The Nazi Party used Italian Fascism as a model for their appearance and policies. Hitler wanted to emulate Benito Mussolini s March on Rome of 1922 by staging his own coup in Bavaria to be followed by a challenge to the government in Berlin. Hitler and Ludendorff sought the support of Staatskommissar State Commissioner Gustav Ritter von Kahr Bavarias de facto ruler. However Kahr along with Police Chief Hans Ritter von Seisser and Reichswehr General Otto von Lossow wanted to install a nationalist dictatorship without Hitler. 116 On 8 November 1923 Hitler and the SA stormed a public meeting of 3 000 people organised by Kahr in the Burgerbraukeller a beer hall in Munich. Interrupting Kahrs speech he announced that the national revolution had begun and declared the formation of a new government with Ludendorff. 117 Retiring to a back room Hitler with his pistol drawn demanded and subsequently received the support of Kahr Seisser and Lossow. 117 Hitlers forces initially succeeded in occupying the local Reichswehr and police headquarters but Kahr and his cohorts quickly withdrew their support. Neither the Army nor the state police joined forces with Hitler. 118 The next day Hitler and his followers marched from the beer hall to the Bavarian War Ministry to overthrow the Bavarian government but police dispersed them. 119 Sixteen Nazi Party members and four police officers were killed in the failed coup. 120 Hitler fled to the home of Ernst Hanfstaengl and by some accounts contemplated suicide. 121 He was depressed but calm when arrested on 11 November 1923 for high treason . 122 His trial before the special Peoples Court in Munich began in February 1924 123 and Alfred Rosenberg became temporary leader of the Nazi Party. On 1 April Hitler was sentenced to five years imprisonment at Landsberg Prison . 124 There he received friendly treatment from the guards and was allowed mail from supporters and regular visits by party comrades. Pardoned by the Bavarian Supreme Court he was released from jail on 20 December 1924 against the state prosecutors objections. 125 Including time on remand Hitler served just over one year in prison. 126 While at Landsberg Hitler dictated most of the first volume of Mein Kampf lit. My Struggle ; originally titled Four and a Half Years of Struggle against Lies Stupidity and Cowardice at first to his chauffeur Emil Maurice and then to his deputy Rudolf Hess . 126 127 The book dedicated to Thule Society member Dietrich Eckart was an autobiography and exposition of his ideology. The book laid out Hitlers plans for transforming German society into one based on race. Throughout the book Jews are equated with germs and presented as the international poisoners of society. According to Hitlers ideology the only solution was their extermination. While Hitler did not describe exactly how this was to be accomplished his inherent genocidal thrust is undeniable according to Ian Kershaw . 128 Published in two volumes in 1925 and 1926 Mein Kampf sold 228 000 copies between 1925 and 1932. One million copies were sold in 1933 Hitlers first year in office. 129 Shortly before Hitler was eligible for parole the Bavarian government attempted to have him deported to Austria. 130 The Austrian federal chancellor rejected the request on the specious grounds that his service in the German Army made his Austrian citizenship void. 131 In response Hitler formally renounced his Austrian citizenship on 7 April 1925. 131 Rebuilding the Nazi Party At the time of Hitlers release from prison politics in Germany had become less combative and the economy had improved limiting Hitlers opportunities for political agitation. As a result of the failed Beer Hall Putsch the Nazi Party and its affiliated organisations were banned in Bavaria. In a meeting with the Prime Minister of Bavaria Heinrich Held on 4 January 1925 Hitler agreed to respect the states authority and promised that he would seek political power only through the democratic process. The meeting paved the way for the ban on the Nazi Party to be lifted on 16 February. 132 However after an inflammatory speech he gave on 27 February Hitler was barred from public speaking by the Bavarian authorities a ban that remained in place until 1927. 133 134 To advance his political ambitions in spite of the ban Hitler appointed Gregor Strasser Otto Strasser and Joseph Goebbels to organise and enlarge the Nazi Party in northern Germany. Gregor Strasser steered a more independent political course emphasising the socialist elements of the partys programme. 135 The stock market in the United States crashed on 24 October 1929 . The impact in Germany was dire: millions became unemployed and several major banks collapsed. Hitler and the Nazi Party prepared to take advantage of the emergency to gain support for their party. They promised to repudiate the Versailles Treaty strengthen the economy and provide jobs. 136 Rise to power Main article: Adolf Hitlers rise to power Nazi Party election results 137 Election Total votes votes Reichstag seats Notes May 1924 1 918 300 6.5 32 Hitler in prison December 1924 907 300 3.0 14 Hitler released from prison May 1928 810 100 2.6 12 September 1930 6 409 600 18.3 107 After the financial crisis July 1932 13 745 000 37.3 230 After Hitler was candidate for presidency November 1932 11 737 000 33.1 196 March 1933 17 277 180 43.9 288 Only partially free during Hitlers term as chancellor of Germany Bruning administration The Great Depression provided a political opportunity for Hitler. Germans were ambivalent about the parliamentary republic which faced challenges from right- and left-wing extremists . The moderate political parties were increasingly unable to stem the tide of extremism and the German referendum of 1929 helped to elevate Nazi ideology. 138 The elections of September 1930 resulted in the break-up of a grand coalition and its replacement with a minority cabinet. Its leader chancellor Heinrich Bruning of the Centre Party governed through emergency decrees from President Paul von Hindenburg . Governance by decree became the new norm and paved the way for authoritarian forms of government. 139 The Nazi Party rose from obscurity to win 18.3 per cent of the vote and 107 parliamentary seats in the 1930 election becoming the second-largest party in parliament. 140 Hitler and Nazi Party treasurer Franz Xaver Schwarz at the dedication of the renovation of the Palais Barlow on Brienner Strae in Munich into the Brown House headquarters December 1930 Hitler made a prominent appearance at the trial of two Reichswehr officers Lieutenants Richard Scheringer and Hanns Ludin in late 1930. Both were charged with membership in the Nazi Party at that time illegal for Reichswehr personnel. 141 The prosecution argued that the Nazi Party was an extremist party prompting defence lawyer Hans Frank to call on Hitler to testify. 142 On 25 September 1930 Hitler testified that his party would pursue political power solely through democratic elections 143 which won him many supporters in the officer corps. 144 Brunings austerity measures brought little economic improvement and were extremely unpopular. 145 Hitler exploited this by targeting his political messages specifically at people who had been affected by the inflation of the 1920s and the Depression such as farmers war veterans and the middle class. 146 Although Hitler had terminated his Austrian citizenship in 1925 he did not acquire German citizenship for almost seven years. This meant that he was stateless legally unable to run for public office and still faced the risk of deportation. 147 On 25 February 1932 the interior minister of Brunswick Dietrich Klagges who was a member of the Nazi Party appointed Hitler as administrator for the states delegation to the Reichsrat in Berlin making Hitler a citizen of Brunswick 148 and thus of Germany. 149 Hitler ran against Hindenburg in the 1932 presidential elections . A speech to the Industry Club in Dusseldorf on 27 January 1932 won him support from many of Germanys most powerful industrialists. 150 Hindenburg had support from various nationalist monarchist Catholic and republican parties and some Social Democrats . Hitler used the campaign slogan Hitler uber Deutschland Hitler over Germany a reference to his political ambitions and his campaigning by aircraft. 151 He was one of the first politicians to use aircraft travel for campaigning and used it effectively. 152 153 Hitler came in second in both rounds of the election garnering more than 35 per cent of the vote in the final election. Although he lost to Hindenburg this election established Hitler as a strong force in German politics. 154 Appointment as chancellor Hitler at a window of the Reich Chancellery receives an ovation on the evening of his inauguration as chancellor 30 January 1933 The absence of an effective government prompted two influential politicians Franz von Papen and Alfred Hugenberg along with several other industrialists and businessmen to write a letter to Hindenburg. The signers urged Hindenburg to appoint Hitler as leader of a government independent from parliamentary parties which could turn into a movement that would enrapture millions of people . 155 156 Hindenburg reluctantly agreed to appoint Hitler as chancellor after two further parliamentary electionsin July and November 1932had not resulted in the formation of a majority government. Hitler headed a short-lived coalition government formed by the Nazi Party which had the most seats in the Reichstag and Hugenbergs party the German National Peoples Party DNVP. On 30 January 1933 the new cabinet was sworn in during a brief ceremony in Hindenburgs office. The Nazi Party gained three posts: Hitler was named chancellor Wilhelm Frick Minister of the Interior and Hermann Goring Minister of the Interior for Prussia. 157 Hitler had insisted on the ministerial positions as a way to gain control over the police in much of Germany. 158 Reichstag fire and March elections Main article: Reichstag fire As chancellor Hitler worked against attempts by the Nazi Partys opponents to build a majority government. Because of the political stalemate he asked Hindenburg to again dissolve the Reichstag and elections were scheduled for early March. On 27 February 1933 the Reichstag building was set on fire . Goring blamed a communist plot as Dutch communist Marinus van der Lubbe was found in incriminating circumstances inside the burning building. 159 Until the 1960s some historians including William L. Shirer and Alan Bullock thought the Nazi Party itself was responsible; 160 161 the current consensus of nearly all historians is that van der Lubbe set the fire alone. 162 At Hitlers urging Hindenburg responded by signing the Reichstag Fire Decree of 28 February drafted by the Nazis which suspended basic rights and allowed detention without trial. The decree was permitted under Article 48 of the Weimar Constitution which gave the president the power to take emergency measures to protect public safety and order. 163 Activities of the German Communist Party KPD were suppressed and some 4 000 KPD members were arrested. 164 In addition to political campaigning the Nazi Party engaged in paramilitary violence and the spread of anti-communist propaganda in the days preceding the election . On election day 6 March 1933 the Nazi Partys share of the vote increased to 43.9 per cent and the party acquired the largest number of seats in parliament. Hitlers party failed to secure an absolute majority necessitating another coalition with the DNVP. 165 Day of Potsdam and the Enabling Act Main article: Enabling Act of 1933 Hitler and Paul von Hindenburg on the Day of Potsdam 21 March 1933 On 21 March 1933 the new Reichstag was constituted with an opening ceremony at the Garrison Church in Potsdam . This Day of Potsdam was held to demonstrate unity between the Nazi movement and the old Prussian elite and military. Hitler appeared in a morning coat and humbly greeted Hindenburg. 166 167 To achieve full political control despite not having an absolute majority in parliament Hitlers government brought the Ermachtigungsgesetz Enabling Act to a vote in the newly elected Reichstag. The Actofficially titled the Gesetz zur Behebung der Not von Volk und Reich Law to Remedy the Distress of People and Reich gave Hitlers cabinet the power to enact laws without the consent of the Reichstag for four years. These laws could with certain exceptions deviate from the constitution. 168 Since it would affect the constitution the Enabling Act required a two-thirds majority to pass. Leaving nothing to chance the Nazis used the provisions of the Reichstag Fire Decree to arrest all 81 Communist deputies in spite of their virulent campaign against the party the Nazis had allowed the KPD to contest the election 169 and prevent several Social Democrats from attending. 170 On 23 March 1933 the Reichstag assembled at the Kroll Opera House under turbulent circumstances. Ranks of SA men served as guards inside the building while large groups outside opposing the proposed legislation shouted slogans and threats towards the arriving members of parliament. 171 After Hitler verbally promised Centre party leader Ludwig Kaas that Hindenburg would retain his power of veto Kaas announced the Centre Party would support the Enabling Act. The Act passed by a vote of 44494 with all parties except the Social Democrats voting in favour. The Enabling Act along with the Reichstag Fire Decree transformed Hitlers government into a de facto legal dictatorship. 172 Dictatorship At the risk of appearing to talk nonsense I tell you that the National Socialist movement will go on for 1 000 years! ... Dont forget how people laughed at me 15 years ago when I declared that one day I would govern Germany. They laugh now just as foolishly when I declare that I shall remain in power! 173 Adolf Hitler to a British correspondent in Berlin June 1934 Having achieved full control over the legislative and executive branches of government Hitler and his allies began to suppress the remaining opposition. The Social Democratic Party was made illegal and its assets were seized. 174 While many trade union delegates were in Berlin for May Day activities SA stormtroopers occupied union offices around the country. On 2 May 1933 all trade unions were forced to dissolve and their leaders were arrested. Some were sent to concentration camps . 175 The German Labour Front was formed as an umbrella organisation to represent all workers administrators and company owners thus reflecting the concept of Nazism in the spirit of Hitlers Volksgemeinschaft peoples community . 176 In 1934 Hitler became Germanys head of state with the title of Fuhrer und Reichskanzler leader and chancellor of the Reich By the end of June the other parties had been intimidated into disbanding. This included the Nazis nominal coalition partner the DNVP; with the SAs help Hitler forced its leader Hugenberg to resign on 29 June. On 14 July 1933 the Nazi Party was declared the only legal political party in Germany. 176 174 The demands of the SA for more political and military power caused anxiety among military industrial and political leaders. In response Hitler purged the entire SA leadership in the Night of the Long Knives which took place from 30 June to 2 July 1934. 177 Hitler targeted Ernst Rohm and other SA leaders who along with a number of Hitlers political adversaries such as Gregor Strasser and former chancellor Kurt von Schleicher were rounded up arrested and shot. 178 While the international community and some Germans were shocked by the killings many in Germany believed Hitler was restoring order. 179 Hindenburg died on 2 August 1934. On the previous day the cabinet had enacted the Law Concerning the Head of State of the German Reich . 2 This law stated that upon Hindenburgs death the office of president would be abolished and its powers merged with those of the chancellor. Hitler thus became head of state as well as head of government and was formally named as Fuhrer und Reichskanzler Leader and Chancellor of the Reich 1 although Reichskanzler was eventually dropped. 180 With this action Hitler eliminated the last legal remedy by which he could be removed from office. 181 As head of state Hitler became commander-in-chief of the armed forces. Immediately after Hindenburgs death at the instigation of the leadership of the Reichswehr the traditional loyalty oath of soldiers was altered to affirm loyalty to Hitler personally by name rather than to the office of commander-in-chief which was later renamed to supreme commander or the state. 182 On 19 August the merger of the presidency with the chancellorship was approved by 88 per cent of the electorate voting in a plebiscite . 183 Hitlers personal standard In early 1938 Hitler used blackmail to consolidate his hold over the military by instigating the BlombergFritsch affair . Hitler forced his War Minister Field Marshal Werner von Blomberg to resign by using a police dossier that showed that Blombergs new wife had a record for prostitution. 184 185 Army commander Colonel-General Werner von Fritsch was removed after the Schutzstaffel SS produced allegations that he had engaged in a homosexual relationship. 186 Both men had fallen into disfavour because they objected to Hitlers demand to make the Wehrmacht ready for war as early as 1938. 187 Hitler assumed Blombergs title of Commander-in-Chief thus taking personal command of the armed forces. He replaced the Ministry of War with the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht OKW headed by General Wilhelm Keitel . On the same day sixteen generals were stripped of their commands and 44 more were transferred; all were suspected of not being sufficiently pro-Nazi. 188 By early February 1938 twelve more generals had been removed. 189 Hitler took care to give his dictatorship the appearance of legality. Many of his decrees were explicitly based on the Reichstag Fire Decree and hence on Article 48 of the Weimar Constitution. The Reichstag renewed the Enabling Act twice each time for a four-year period. 190 While elections to the Reichstag were still held in 1933 1936 and 1938 voters were presented with a single list of Nazis and pro-Nazi guests which received well over 90 per cent of the vote. 191 These sham elections were held in far-from-secret conditions; the Nazis threatened severe reprisals against anyone who did not vote or who voted against. 192 Nazi Germany Main article: Nazi Germany Part of a series on Nazism Organizations Ahnenerbe Geheime Staatspolizei Deutsches Jungvolk Hitler Youth League of German Girls NSDAB NSDStB NSRL NSFK NSKK NSF Nationalsozialistische Monatshefte Nazi Party Sturmabteilung SA Schutzstaffel SS History Early timeline National Socialist Program Hitlers rise to power Machtergreifung Gleichschaltung German rearmament Nazi Germany Religion in Nazi Germany Kirchenkampf Adolf Hitlers cult of personality Enabling Act of 1933 Night of the Long Knives Nuremberg rallies Nuremberg Laws Anti-Comintern Pact Kristallnacht Anschluss World War II The Holocaust 19381939 German expedition to Tibet Tripartite Pact Denazification Nuremberg trials Neo-Nazism Final solution Concentration camps Deportations Doctors Trial Extermination camps Genocide Ghettos Human experimentation Labour camps Pogroms Racial segregation Ideology Aestheticization of politics Anti-communism Anti-intellectualism Anti-liberalism Anti-pacifism Blood and soil Chauvinism Class collaboration Conspiracism Dolchstolegende Jewish conspiracy theory Corporatism Cult of personality Dictatorship Fuhrerprinzip Direct action Economic interventionism Eugenics Geopolitik Heimat Imperialism Greater Germanic Reich Heim ins Reich Lebensraum Pan-Germanism Militarism Nationalism Ethno Racial Palingenetic Ultra New Man New Order One-party state Populism Propaganda Prussianism Racism Antisemitism Anti-Slavic sentiment Aryan race Aryanism Master race Nordicism Rassenschande Untermenschen Volkisch equality Volkisch movement Reactionary modernism Social Darwinism Social interventionism Social order State capitalism Syncretism Totalitarianism Volksgemeinschaft Volk ohne Raum Volkskorper Politicians Bormann Daluege Donitz Drexler Eichmann Frank Frick Hess Heydrich Himmler Hitler Goebbels Goring Lammers von Ribbentrop Rohm Schacht von Schirach Seyss-Inquart Speer Strasser Gregor Strasser Otto Streicher Ideologues Anacker Bergmann Baeumler Burnouf Chamberlain Darre Drumont Eckart Feder Ford de Gobineau Grimm Hauer Haushofer al-Husseini Jung Krannhals Kriek von Liebenfels von List Lons Muller Plenge Ratzel Rosenberg Saadeh Schafer Schmalenbach Schmitt von Sebottendorf Schwarz Stapel Literature An Essay on the Inequality of the Human Races 1855 The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century 1899 The Protocols of the Elders of Zion 1903 The Passing of the Great Race 1916 Preussentum und Sozialismus 1919 The International Jew 1920s Rassenkunde des deutschen Volkes 1922 Das Dritte Reich 1923 Mein Kampf 1925 Hitlers Zweites Buch 1928 The Myth of the Twentieth Century 1930 Religion Ariosophy Thule Society Christmas Esoteric Nazism German Evangelical Church Deutsche Christen German Faith Movement Germanic paganism Heathenry Gottglaubig Kirchenkampf Occultism Positive Christianity Religious views of Adolf Hitler Symbolism Outside of Germany Americas Brazil Chile Europe Greece Sweden Parties American Nazi Party Arrow Cross Party Hungary German American Bund German National Movement in Liechtenstein Nasjonal Samling Norway National Socialist Movement in the Netherlands National Socialist Movement of Chile National Socialist Movement United States National Socialist Workers Party of Denmark Nordic Resistance Movement Ossewabrandwag South Africa SUMKA Iran Syrian Social Nationalist Party Tsagaan Khas Mongolia World Union of National Socialists Lists Bibliography of Adolf Hitler Nazi ideologues Nazi Party leaders and officials Nazi Party members Last surviving war crime suspects Speeches given by Adolf Hitler SS personnel Related topics Art Architecture Cinema Atszism Beefsteak Nazi Economy Glossary Drang nach Osten Generalplan Ost German Romanticism Political views of Adolf Hitler Racial theories Sorelianism Strasserism Women Category Germany portal v t e Part of a series on Antisemitism Part of Jewish history and discrimination History Timeline Reference Definitions Jerusalem Declaration on Antisemitism Nexus Document Three Ds Working definition of antisemitism Geography Argentina Australia Austria Belarus Belgium Canada Chinese Chilean Costa Rican Europe France Dreyfus affair 21st-century Germany Greece Hungary Italy Japan New Zealand Norway Pakistan Palestine Romania Russia Imperial Russia Soviet Union Stalinist Saudi Arabia textbook controversy South Africa Spain Sweden Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Conservative Party Labour Party USA History 21st century Venezuela Manifestations Academic Alt-right Arab Christian Christian Identity Creativity Economic during the Gaza War 2008-09 during the Israel-Hamas war 2023-24 Holocaust denial Islamic Jewish Medieval Nation of Islam Nazism Neo-Nazi Strasserism New Olympic Racial Religious Secondary COVID-19 pandemic incidents Zionist Antisemitic tropes Andinia Plan Blood libel Cohen Plan Cultural Bolshevism Cultural Marxism Deicide Finance control Franklin Prophecy Host desecration International Jewish conspiracy Jewish lobby Jewish war conspiracy theory Judensau Judeo-Bolshevism Zydokomuna Judeo-Masonism Kosher tax Media control QAnon Rootless cosmopolitan Doctors plot Slansky trial Stab-in-the-back myth Well poisoning White genocide ZOG conspiracy Antisemitic publications 21 Paths to the Kingdom of Darkness Adversus Judaeos The Barnes Review Black Notebooks Culture of Critique Currency Wars The Dearborn Independent Judaism Without Embellishment La France juive Hitlers Zweites Buch Hunter 1988 Hamas Charter The International Jew La Libre Parole The Light Mein Kampf On the Jews and Their Lies Our Race Will Rule Undisputed Over The World Protocols of the Elders of Zion The Secret Relationship Between Blacks and Jews Sex and Character Siege The Turner Diaries Antisemitism on the Internet 4chan pol 8chan The Daily Stormer Disclose.tv Europa: The Last Battle Gab Goebbels Gap GoyimTV Groypers Jew Watch Metapedia The Occidental Observer Red Ice Renegade Tribune The Right Stuff blog StoneToss Stormfront Terrorgram Triple parentheses TruNews The Unz Review Veterans Today Prominent figures Baked Alaska Andrew Anglin Louis Beam Don Black James von Brunn Richard Girnt Butler Edouard Drumont David Duke Adolf Eichmann Louis Farrakhan Henry Ford Theodor Fritsch Nick Fuentes Joseph Goebbels Heinrich Himmler Adolf Hitler Arthur J. Jones Osama bin Laden David Lane Ernest G. Liebold Martin Luther Kevin MacDonald Wilhelm Marr Eustace Mullins William Luther Pierce Alfred Rosenberg Richard B. Spencer Joseph Stalin Wilhelm Stapel Julius Streicher Kevin Alfred Strom Rick Wiles Ernst Zundel Corneliu Zelea Codreanu Ion Antonescu Horia Sima A. C. Cuza Octavian Goga Gheorghe Buzatu Nae Ionescu Nichifor Crainic Ioan Slavici Laszlo Ferenczy Philippe Petain Symon Petliura Stepan Bandera Gamal Abdel Nasser Richard Wagner Otto Weininger Persecution Rhineland massacres Black Death persecutions Boycotts Expulsions Jewish quarter Ghettos in Europe Mellah The Holocaust Jewish hat Jewish quota Judensau Martyrdom in Judaism Nuremberg Laws Pale of Settlement Pogroms Russian Empire Russian Civil War Refuseniks Segregation Spanish Inquisition Yellow badge Opposition Anti-antisemitism in Germany Anti-Defamation League Campaign Against Antisemitism Community Security Trust Fundamental Rights Agency Philosemitism Simon Wiesenthal Center Southern Poverty Law Center Stephen Roth Institute Swedish Committee Against Antisemitism Union of Councils for Soviet Jews UN Watch U.S. National Strategy to Counter Antisemitism Wiener Holocaust Library Working definition of antisemitism IHRA Jerusalem Declaration on Antisemitism Yad Vashem Related topics Ethnic Cleansing video game Philosemitism Self-hating Jew Weaponization Anti-Zionism Zionist antisemitism Category v t e Ceremony honouring the dead Totenehrung on the terrace in front of the Hall of Honour Ehrenhalle at the Nazi Party Rally Grounds in Nuremberg in September 1934 Economy and culture Main article: Economy of Nazi Germany In August 1934 Hitler appointed Reichsbank President Hjalmar Schacht as Minister of Economics and in the following year as Plenipotentiary for War Economy in charge of preparing the economy for war. 193 Reconstruction and rearmament were financed through Mefo bills printing money and seizing the assets of people arrested as enemies of the State including Jews. 194 The number of unemployed fell from six million in 1932 to fewer than one million in 1936. 195 Hitler oversaw one of the largest infrastructure improvement campaigns in German history leading to the construction of dams autobahns railroads and other civil works. Wages were slightly lower in the mid to late 1930s compared with wages during the Weimar Republic while the cost of living increased by 25 per cent. 196 The average work week increased during the shift to a war economy; by 1939 the average German was working between 47 and 50 hours a week. 197 Hitlers government sponsored architecture on an immense scale. Albert Speer instrumental in implementing Hitlers classicist reinterpretation of German culture was placed in charge of the proposed architectural renovations of Berlin . 198 Despite a threatened multi-nation boycott Germany hosted the 1936 Olympic Games. Hitler officiated at the opening ceremonies and attended events at both the Winter Games in Garmisch-Partenkirchen and the Summer Games in Berlin. 199 Rearmament and new alliances Main articles: Axis powers Tripartite Pact and German re-armament In a meeting with German military leaders on 3 February 1933 Hitler spoke of conquest for Lebensraum in the East and its ruthless Germanisation as his ultimate foreign policy objectives. 200 In March Prince Bernhard Wilhelm von Bulow secretary at the Foreign Office Auswartiges Amt issued a statement of major foreign policy aims: Anschluss with Austria the restoration of Germanys national borders of 1914 rejection of military restrictions under the Treaty of Versailles the return of the former German colonies in Africa and a German zone of influence in Eastern Europe. Hitler found Bulows goals to be too modest. 201 In speeches during this period he stressed the peaceful goals of his policies and a willingness to work within international agreements. 202 At the first meeting of his cabinet in 1933 Hitler prioritised military spending over unemployment relief. 203 Germany withdrew from the League of Nations and the World Disarmament Conference in October 1933. 204 In January 1935 over 90 per cent of the people of the Saarland then under League of Nations administration voted to unite with Germany . 205 That March Hitler announced an expansion of the Wehrmacht to 600 000 memberssix times the number permitted by the Versailles Treaty including development of an air force Luftwaffe and an increase in the size of the navy Kriegsmarine . Britain France Italy and the League of Nations condemned these violations of the Treaty but did nothing to stop it. 206 207 The Anglo-German Naval Agreement AGNA of 18 June allowed German tonnage to increase to 35 per cent of that of the British navy. Hitler called the signing of the AGNA the happiest day of his life believing that the agreement marked the beginning of the Anglo-German alliance he had predicted in Mein Kampf . 208 France and Italy were not consulted before the signing directly undermining the League of Nations and setting the Treaty of Versailles on the path towards irrelevance. 209 Germany reoccupied the demilitarised zone in the Rhineland in March 1936 in violation of the Versailles Treaty. Hitler also sent troops to Spain to support Francisco Franco during the Spanish Civil War after receiving an appeal for help in July 1936. At the same time Hitler continued his efforts to create an Anglo-German alliance. 210 In August 1936 in response to a growing economic crisis caused by his rearmament efforts Hitler ordered Goring to implement a Four Year Plan to prepare Germany for war within the next four years. 211 The plan envisaged an all-out struggle between Judeo-Bolshevism and German Nazism which in Hitlers view required a committed effort of rearmament regardless of the economic costs. 212 In October 1936 Count Galeazzo Ciano foreign minister of Mussolinis government visited Germany where he signed a Nine-Point Protocol as an expression of rapprochement and had a personal meeting with Hitler. On 1 November Mussolini declared an axis between Germany and Italy. 213 On 25 November Germany signed the Anti-Comintern Pact with Japan . Britain China Italy and Poland were also invited to join the Anti-Comintern Pact but only Italy signed in 1937. Hitler abandoned his plan of an Anglo-German alliance blaming inadequate British leadership. 214 At a meeting in the Reich Chancellery with his foreign ministers and military chiefs that November Hitler restated his intention of acquiring Lebensraum for the German people. He ordered preparations for war in the East to begin as early as 1938 and no later than 1943. In the event of his death the conference minutes recorded as the Hossbach Memorandum were to be regarded as his political testament . 215 He felt that a severe decline in living standards in Germany as a result of the economic crisis could only be stopped by military aggression aimed at seizing Austria and Czechoslovakia . 216 217 Hitler urged quick action before Britain and France gained a permanent lead in the arms race . 216 In early 1938 in the wake of the BlombergFritsch affair Hitler asserted control of the military-foreign policy apparatus dismissing Neurath as foreign minister and appointing himself as War Minister. 211 From early 1938 onwards Hitler was carrying out a foreign policy ultimately aimed at war. 218 World War II Hitler and the Japanese foreign minister Yosuke Matsuoka at a meeting in Berlin in March 1941. In the background is Joachim von Ribbentrop . Early diplomatic successes Alliance with Japan See also: GermanyJapan relations In February 1938 on the advice of his newly appointed foreign minister the strongly pro-Japanese Joachim von Ribbentrop Hitler ended the Sino-German alliance with the Republic of China to instead enter into an alliance with the more modern and powerful Empire of Japan . Hitler announced German recognition of Manchukuo the Japanese puppet state in Manchuria and renounced German claims to their former colonies in the Pacific held by Japan. 219 Hitler ordered an end to arms shipments to China and recalled all German officers working with the Chinese Army. 219 In retaliation Chinese General Chiang Kai-shek cancelled all Sino-German economic agreements depriving the Germans of many Chinese raw materials. 220 Austria and Czechoslovakia October 1938: Hitler is driven through the crowd in Cheb German: Eger in the Sudetenland . On 12 March 1938 Hitler announced the unification of Austria with Nazi Germany in the Anschluss . 221 222 Hitler then turned his attention to the ethnic German population of the Sudetenland region of Czechoslovakia. 223 On 2829 March 1938 Hitler held a series of secret meetings in Berlin with Konrad Henlein of the Sudeten German Party the largest of the ethnic German parties of the Sudetenland. The men agreed that Henlein would demand increased autonomy for Sudeten Germans from the Czechoslovakian government thus providing a pretext for German military action against Czechoslovakia. In April 1938 Henlein told the foreign minister of Hungary that whatever the Czech government might offer he would always raise still higher demands ... he wanted to sabotage an understanding by any means because this was the only method to blow up Czechoslovakia quickly . 224 In private Hitler considered the Sudeten issue unimportant; his real intention was a war of conquest against Czechoslovakia. 225 In April Hitler ordered the OKW to prepare for Fall Grun Case Green the code name for an invasion of Czechoslovakia. 226 As a result of intense French and British diplomatic pressure on 5 September Czechoslovakian President Edvard Benes unveiled the Fourth Plan for constitutional reorganisation of his country which agreed to most of Henleins demands for Sudeten autonomy. 227 Henleins party responded to Benes offer by instigating a series of violent clashes with the Czechoslovakian police that led to the declaration of martial law in certain Sudeten districts. 228 229 Germany was dependent on imported oil; a confrontation with Britain over the Czechoslovakian dispute could curtail Germanys oil supplies. This forced Hitler to call off Fall Grun originally planned for 1 October 1938. 230 On 29 September Hitler Neville Chamberlain Edouard Daladier and Mussolini attended a one-day conference in Munich that led to the Munich Agreement which handed over the Sudetenland districts to Germany. 231 232 Chamberlain was satisfied with the Munich conference calling the outcome peace for our time while Hitler was angered about the missed opportunity for war in 1938; 233 234 he expressed his disappointment in a speech on 9 October in Saarbrucken . 235 In Hitlers view the British-brokered peace although favourable to the ostensible German demands was a diplomatic defeat which spurred his intent of limiting British power to pave the way for the eastern expansion of Germany. 236 237 As a result of the summit Hitler was selected Time magazines Man of the Year for 1938. 238 In late 1938 and early 1939 the continuing economic crisis caused by rearmament forced Hitler to make major defence cuts. 239 In his Export or die speech of 30 January 1939 he called for an economic offensive to increase German foreign exchange holdings to pay for raw materials such as high-grade iron needed for military weapons. 239 On 14 March 1939 under threat from Hungary Slovakia declared independence and received protection from Germany. 240 The next day in violation of the Munich Agreement and possibly as a result of the deepening economic crisis requiring additional assets 241 Hitler ordered the Wehrmacht to invade the Czech rump state and from Prague Castle he proclaimed the territory a German protectorate . 242 Start of World War II See also: Causes of World War II Boundaries of the Nazi planned Greater Germanic Reich In private discussions in 1939 Hitler declared Britain the main enemy to be defeated and that Polands obliteration was a necessary prelude for that goal. 243 The eastern flank would be secured and land would be added to Germanys Lebensraum . 244 Offended by the British guarantee on 31 March 1939 of Polish independence he said I shall brew them a devils drink . 245 In a speech in Wilhelmshaven for the launch of the battleship Tirpitz on 1 April he threatened to denounce the Anglo-German Naval Agreement if the British continued to guarantee Polish independence which he perceived as an encirclement policy. 245 Poland was to either become a German satellite state or it would be neutralised in order to secure the Reichs eastern flank and prevent a possible British blockade. 246 Hitler initially favoured the idea of a satellite state but upon its rejection by the Polish government he decided to invade and made this the main foreign policy goal of 1939. 247 On 3 April Hitler ordered the military to prepare for Fall Weiss Case White the plan for invading Poland on 25 August. 247 In a Reichstag speech on 28 April he renounced both the Anglo-German Naval Agreement and the GermanPolish Non-Aggression Pact . 248 Historians such as William Carr Gerhard Weinberg and Ian Kershaw have argued that one reason for Hitlers rush to war was his fear of an early death. He had repeatedly claimed that he must lead Germany into war before he got too old as his successors might lack his strength of will. 249 250 251 Hitler was concerned that a military attack against Poland could result in a premature war with Britain. 246 252 Hitlers foreign minister and former Ambassador to London Joachim von Ribbentrop assured him that neither Britain nor France would honour their commitments to Poland. 253 254 Accordingly on 22 August 1939 Hitler ordered a military mobilisation against Poland. 255 This plan required tacit Soviet support 256 and the non-aggression pact the MolotovRibbentrop Pact between Germany and the Soviet Union led by Joseph Stalin included a secret agreement to partition Poland between the two countries. 257 Contrary to Ribbentrops prediction that Britain would sever Anglo-Polish ties Britain and Poland signed the Anglo-Polish alliance on 25 August 1939. This along with news from Italy that Mussolini would not honour the Pact of Steel prompted Hitler to postpone the attack on Poland from 25 August to 1 September. 258 Hitler unsuccessfully tried to manoeuvre the British into neutrality by offering them a non-aggression guarantee on 25 August; he then instructed Ribbentrop to present a last-minute peace plan with an impossibly short time limit in an effort to blame the imminent war on British and Polish inaction. 259 260 On 1 September 1939 Germany invaded western Poland under the pretext of having been denied claims to the Free City of Danzig and the right to extraterritorial roads across the Polish Corridor which Germany had ceded under the Versailles Treaty. 261 In response Britain and France declared war on Germany on 3 September surprising Hitler and prompting him to angrily ask Ribbentrop Now what? 262 France and Britain did not act on their declarations immediately and on 17 September Soviet forces invaded eastern Poland. 263 Hitler reviews troops on the march during the campaign against Poland September 1939. The fall of Poland was followed by what contemporary journalists dubbed the Phoney War or Sitzkrieg sitting war . Hitler instructed the two newly appointed Gauleiters of north-western Poland Albert Forster of Reichsgau Danzig-West Prussia and Arthur Greiser of Reichsgau Wartheland to Germanise their areas with no questions asked about how this was accomplished. 264 In Forsters area ethnic Poles merely had to sign forms stating that they had German blood. 265 In contrast Greiser agreed with Himmler and carried out an ethnic cleansing campaign towards Poles. Greiser soon complained that Forster was allowing thousands of Poles to be accepted as racial Germans and thus endangered German racial purity . 264 Hitler refrained from getting involved. This inaction has been advanced as an example of the theory of working towards the Fuhrer in which Hitler issued vague instructions and expected his subordinates to work out policies on their own. 264 266 Another dispute pitched one side represented by Heinrich Himmler and Greiser who championed ethnic cleansing in Poland against another represented by Goring and Hans Frank governor-general of occupied Poland who called for turning Poland into the granary of the Reich. On 12 February 1940 the dispute was initially settled in favour of the GoringFrank view which ended the economically disruptive mass expulsions. On 15 May 1940 Himmler issued a memo entitled Some Thoughts on the Treatment of Alien Population in the East calling for the expulsion of the entire Jewish population of Europe into Africa and the reduction of the Polish population to a leaderless class of labourers . Hitler called Himmlers memo good and correct and ignoring Goring and Frank implemented the HimmlerGreiser policy in Poland. 267 Hitler visits Paris with architect Albert Speer left and sculptor Arno Breker right 23 June 1940. On 9 April German forces invaded Denmark and Norway . On the same day Hitler proclaimed the birth of the Greater Germanic Reich his vision of a united empire of Germanic nations of Europe in which the Dutch Flemish and Scandinavians were joined into a racially pure polity under German leadership. 268 In May 1940 Germany attacked France and conquered Luxembourg the Netherlands and Belgium . These victories prompted Mussolini to have Italy join forces with Hitler on 10 June. France and Germany signed an armistice on 22 June. 269 Kershaw notes that Hitlers popularity within Germanyand German support for the warreached its peak when he returned to Berlin on 6 July from his tour of Paris. 270 Following the unexpected swift victory Hitler promoted twelve generals to the rank of field marshal during the 1940 Field Marshal Ceremony . 271 272 Britain whose troops were forced to evacuate France by sea from Dunkirk 273 continued to fight alongside other British dominions in the Battle of the Atlantic . Hitler made peace overtures to the new British leader Winston Churchill and upon their rejection he ordered a series of aerial attacks on Royal Air Force airbases and radar stations in southeast England. On 7 September the systematic nightly bombing of London began. The German Luftwaffe failed to defeat the Royal Air Force in what became known as the Battle of Britain . 274 By the end of September Hitler realised that air superiority for the invasion of Britain in Operation Sea Lion could not be achieved and ordered the operation postponed. The nightly air raids on British cities intensified and continued for months including London Plymouth and Coventry . 275 On 27 September 1940 the Tripartite Pact was signed in Berlin by Saburo Kurusu of Imperial Japan Hitler and Italian foreign minister Ciano 276 and later expanded to include Hungary Romania and Bulgaria thus yielding the Axis powers . Hitlers attempt to integrate the Soviet Union into the anti-British bloc failed after inconclusive talks between Hitler and Molotov in Berlin in November and he ordered preparations for the invasion of the Soviet Union. 277 In early 1941 German forces were deployed to North Africa the Balkans and the Middle East. In February German forces arrived in Libya to bolster the Italian presence. In April Hitler launched the invasion of Yugoslavia quickly followed by the invasion of Greece . 278 In May German forces were sent to support Iraqi forces fighting against the British and to invade Crete . 279 Path to defeat Hitler announcing the declaration of war against the United States to the Reichstag on 11 December 1941 Adolf Hitler and Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim in Finland in June 1942 On 22 June 1941 contravening the MolotovRibbentrop Pact of 1939 over three million Axis troops attacked the Soviet Union . 280 This offensive codenamed Operation Barbarossa was intended to destroy the Soviet Union and seize its natural resources for subsequent aggression against the Western powers. 281 282 The action was also part of the overall plan to obtain more living space for German people; and Hitler thought a successful invasion would force Britain to negotiate a surrender. 283 The invasion conquered a huge area including the Baltic republics Belarus and West Ukraine . By early August Axis troops had advanced 500 km 310 mi and won the Battle of Smolensk . Hitler ordered Army Group Centre to temporarily halt its advance to Moscow and divert its Panzer groups to aid in the encirclement of Leningrad and Kiev . 284 His generals disagreed with this change having advanced within 400 km 250 mi of Moscow and his decision caused a crisis among the military leadership. 285 286 The pause provided the Red Army with an opportunity to mobilise fresh reserves; historian Russel Stolfi considers it to be one of the major factors that caused the failure of the Moscow offensive which was resumed in October 1941 and ended disastrously in December . 284 During this crisis Hitler appointed himself as head of the Oberkommando des Heeres . 287 On 7 December 1941 Japan attacked the American fleet based at Pearl Harbor Hawaii. Four days later Hitler declared war against the United States . 288 On 18 December 1941 Himmler asked Hitler What to do with the Jews of Russia? to which Hitler replied als Partisanen auszurotten exterminate them as partisans . 289 Israeli historian Yehuda Bauer has commented that the remark is probably as close as historians will ever get to a definitive order from Hitler for the genocide carried out during the Holocaust . 289 In late 1942 German forces were defeated in the Second Battle of El Alamein 290 thwarting Hitlers plans to seize the Suez Canal and the Middle East. Overconfident in his own military expertise following the earlier victories in 1940 Hitler became distrustful of his Army High Command and began to interfere in military and tactical planning with damaging consequences. 291 In December 1942 and January 1943 Hitlers repeated refusal to allow their withdrawal at the Battle of Stalingrad led to the almost total destruction of the 6th Army . Over 200 000 Axis soldiers were killed and 235 000 were taken prisoner. 292 Thereafter came a decisive strategic defeat at the Battle of Kursk . 293 Hitlers military judgement became increasingly erratic and Germanys military and economic position deteriorated as did Hitlers health. 294 The destroyed map room at the Wolfs Lair Hitlers eastern command post after the 20 July plot Following the Allied invasion of Sicily in 1943 Mussolini was removed from power by King Victor Emmanuel III after a vote of no confidence of the Grand Council of Fascism . Marshal Pietro Badoglio placed in charge of the government soon surrendered to the Allies . 295 Throughout 1943 and 1944 the Soviet Union steadily forced Hitlers armies into retreat along the Eastern Front . On 6 June 1944 the Western Allied armies landed in northern France in one of the largest amphibious operations in history Operation Overlord . 296 Many German officers concluded that defeat was inevitable and that continuing under Hitlers leadership would result in the complete destruction of the country . 297 Between 1939 and 1945 there were numerous plans to assassinate Hitler some of which proceeded to significant degrees. 298 The most well-known and significant the 20 July plot of 1944 came from within Germany and was at least partly driven by the increasing prospect of a German defeat in the war. 299 Part of Operation Valkyrie the plot involved Claus von Stauffenberg planting a bomb in one of Hitlers headquarters the Wolfs Lair at Rastenburg . Hitler narrowly survived because staff officer Heinz Brandt moved the briefcase containing the bomb behind a leg of the heavy conference table which deflected much of the blast. Later Hitler ordered savage reprisals resulting in the execution of more than 4 900 people. 300 Hitler was put on the United Nations War Crimes Commission s first list of war criminals in December 1944 after determining that Hitler could be held criminally responsible for the acts of the Nazis in occupied countries. By March 1945 at least seven indictments had been filed against him. 301 Defeat and death Main article: Death of Adolf Hitler Hitler in his last filmed appearance honouring Hitler Youth members of the Volkssturm in the Reich Chancellery garden Front page of the US Armed Forces newspaper Stars and Stripes 2 May 1945 announcing Hitlers death. It erroneously states that Hitler died on 1 May; he died on 30 April. By late 1944 both the Red Army and the Western Allies were advancing into Germany. Recognising the strength and determination of the Red Army Hitler decided to use his remaining mobile reserves against the American and British armies which he perceived as far weaker. 302 On 16 December he launched the Ardennes Offensive to incite disunity among the Western Allies and perhaps convince them to join his fight against the Soviets. 303 After some temporary successes the offensive failed. 304 With much of Germany in ruins in January 1945 Hitler spoke on the radio: However grave as the crisis may be at this moment it will despite everything be mastered by our unalterable will. 305 Acting on his view that Germanys military failures meant it had forfeited its right to survive as a nation Hitler ordered the destruction of all German industrial infrastructure before it could fall into Allied hands. 306 Minister for Armaments Albert Speer was entrusted with executing this scorched earth policy but he secretly disobeyed the order. 306 307 Hitlers hope to negotiate peace with the United States and Britain was encouraged by the death of US President Franklin D. Roosevelt on 12 April 1945 but contrary to his expectations this caused no rift among the Allies. 303 308 On 20 April his 56th and final birthday Hitler made his last trip from the Fuhrerbunker to the surface. In the ruined garden of the Reich Chancellery he awarded Iron Crosses to boy soldiers of the Hitler Youth who were now fighting the Red Army at the front near Berlin. 309 By 21 April Georgy Zhukov s 1st Belorussian Front had broken through the defences of General Gotthard Heinrici s Army Group Vistula during the Battle of the Seelow Heights and advanced to the outskirts of Berlin. 310 In denial about the dire situation Hitler placed his hopes on the undermanned and under-equipped Armeeabteilung Steiner Army Detachment Steiner commanded by Felix Steiner . Hitler ordered Steiner to attack the northern flank of the salient while the German Ninth Army was ordered to attack northward in a pincer attack . 311 During a military conference on 22 April Hitler inquired about Steiners offensive. He was informed that the attack had not been launched and that the Soviets had entered Berlin. Hitler ordered everyone but Wilhelm Keitel Alfred Jodl Hans Krebs and Wilhelm Burgdorf to leave the room 312 then launched into a tirade against the perceived treachery and incompetence of his generals culminating in his declarationfor the first timethat everything is lost . 313 He announced that he would stay in Berlin until the end and then shoot himself. 314 By 23 April the Red Army had surrounded Berlin 315 and Goebbels made a proclamation urging its citizens to defend the city. 312 That same day Goring sent a telegram from Berchtesgaden arguing that as Hitler was isolated in Berlin Goring should assume leadership of Germany. Goring set a deadline after which he would consider Hitler incapacitated. 316 Hitler responded by having Goring arrested and in his last will and testament of 29 April he removed Goring from all government positions. 317 318 On 28 April Hitler discovered that Himmler who had left Berlin on 20 April was attempting to negotiate a surrender to the Western Allies. 319 320 He considered this treason and ordered Himmlers arrest. He also ordered the execution of Hermann Fegelein Himmlers SS representative at Hitlers headquarters in Berlin for desertion. 321 After midnight on the night of 2829 April Hitler married Eva Braun in a small civil ceremony in the Fuhrerbunker . 322 g Later that afternoon Hitler was informed that Mussolini had been executed by the Italian resistance movement on the previous day; this is believed to have increased his determination to avoid capture. 323 On 30 April Soviet troops were within five hundred metres of the Reich Chancellery when Hitler shot himself in the head and Braun bit into a cyanide capsule. 324 325 In accordance with Hitlers wishes their corpses were carried outside to the garden behind the Reich Chancellery where they were placed in a bomb crater doused with petrol and set on fire as the Red Army shelling continued. 326 327 328 Grand Admiral Karl Donitz and Goebbels assumed Hitlers roles as head of state and chancellor respectively. 329 On the evening of 1 May Goebbels and his wife Magda committed suicide in the Reich Chancellery garden after having poisoned their six children with cyanide. 330 Berlin surrendered on 2 May. The remains of the Goebbels family General Hans Krebs who had committed suicide that day and Hitlers dog Blondi were repeatedly buried and exhumed by the Soviets. 331 Hitlers and Brauns remains were alleged to have been moved as well but this is most likely Soviet disinformation . There is no evidence that any identifiable remains of Hitler or Braunwith the exception of dental bridgeswere ever found by them. 332 333 334 While news of Hitlers death spread quickly a death certificate was not issued until 1956 after a lengthy investigation to collect testimony from 42 witnesses. Hitlers death was entered as an assumption of death based on this testimony. 335 The Holocaust Main articles: The Holocaust and Final Solution If the international Jewish financiers in and outside Europe should succeed in plunging the nations once more into a world war then the result will not be the Bolshevisation of the earth and thus the victory of Jewry but the annihilation of the Jewish race in Europe! 336 Adolf Hitler 30 January 1939 Reichstag speech A wagon piled high with corpses outside the crematorium in the liberated Buchenwald concentration camp April 1945 The Holocaust and Germanys war in the East were based on Hitlers long-standing view that the Jews were the enemy of the German people and that Lebensraum was needed for Germanys expansion. He focused on Eastern Europe for this expansion aiming to defeat Poland and the Soviet Union and then removing or killing the Jews and Slavs . 337 The Generalplan Ost General Plan East called for deporting the population of occupied Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union to West Siberia for use as slave labour or to be murdered; 338 the conquered territories were to be colonised by German or Germanised settlers. 339 The goal was to implement this plan after the conquest of the Soviet Union but when this failed Hitler moved the plans forward. 338 340 By January 1942 he had decided that the Jews Slavs and other deportees considered undesirable should be killed. 341 h Hitlers order for Aktion T4 dated 1 September 1939 The genocide was organised and executed by Heinrich Himmler and Reinhard Heydrich . The records of the Wannsee Conference held on 20 January 1942 and led by Heydrich with fifteen senior Nazi officials participating provide the clearest evidence of systematic planning for the Holocaust. On 22 February Hitler was recorded saying we shall regain our health only by eliminating the Jews . 342 Similarly at a meeting in July 1941 with leading functionaries of the Eastern territories Hitler said that the easiest way to quickly pacify the areas would be best achieved by shooting everyone who even looks odd . 343 Although no direct order from Hitler authorising the mass killings has surfaced 344 his public speeches orders to his generals and the diaries of Nazi officials demonstrate that he conceived and authorised the extermination of European Jewry. 345 346 During the war Hitler repeatedly stated his prophecy of 1939 was being fulfilled namely that a world war would bring about the annihilation of the Jewish race. 347 Hitler approved the Einsatzgruppen killing squads that followed the German army through Poland the Baltic and the Soviet Union 348 and was well informed about their activities. 345 349 By summer 1942 Auschwitz concentration camp was expanded to accommodate large numbers of deportees for murder or enslavement . 350 Scores of other concentration camps and satellite camps were set up throughout Europe with several camps devoted exclusively to extermination . 351 Between 1939 and 1945 the Schutzstaffel SS assisted by collaborationist governments and recruits from occupied countries were responsible for the deaths of at least eleven million non-combatants 352 338 including the murders of about 6 million Jews representing two-thirds of the Jewish population of Europe 353 i and between 200 000 and 1 500 000 Romani people . 355 353 The victims were killed in concentration and extermination camps and in ghettos and through mass shootings. 356 357 Many victims of the Holocaust were murdered in gas chambers or shot while others died of starvation or disease or while working as slave labourers . 356 357 In addition to eliminating Jews the Nazis planned to reduce the population of the conquered territories by 30 million people through starvation in an action called the Hunger Plan . Food supplies would be diverted to the German army and German civilians. Cities would be razed and the land allowed to return to forest or resettled by German colonists. 358 Together the Hunger Plan and Generalplan Ost would have led to the starvation of 80 million people in the Soviet Union. 359 These partially fulfilled plans resulted in additional deaths bringing the total number of civilians and prisoners of war who died in the democide to an estimated 19.3 million people. 360 Hitlers policies resulted in the killing of nearly two million non-Jewish Polish civilians 361 over three million Soviet prisoners of war 362 communists and other political opponents homosexuals the physically and mentally disabled 363 364 Jehovahs Witnesses Adventists and trade unionists. Hitler never spoke publicly about the killings and seems to have never visited the concentration camps. 365 The Nazis embraced the concept of racial hygiene . On 15 September 1935 Hitler presented two lawsknown as the Nuremberg Laws to the Reichstag. The laws banned sexual relations and marriages between Aryans and Jews and were later extended to include Gypsies Negroes or their bastard offspring . 366 The laws stripped all non-Aryans of their German citizenship and forbade the employment of non-Jewish women under the age of 45 in Jewish households. 367 Hitlers early eugenic policies targeted children with physical and developmental disabilities in a programme dubbed Action Brandt and he later authorised a euthanasia programme for adults with serious mental and physical disabilities now referred to as Aktion T4 . 368 Leadership style Hitler during a meeting at the headquarters of Army Group South in June 1942 Hitler ruled the Nazi Party autocratically by asserting the Fuhrerprinzip leader principle. The principle relied on absolute obedience of all subordinates to their superiors; thus he viewed the government structure as a pyramid with himselfthe infallible leader at the apex. Rank in the party was not determined by electionspositions were filled through appointment by those of higher rank who demanded unquestioning obedience to the will of the leader. 369 Hitlers leadership style was to give contradictory orders to his subordinates and to place them into positions where their duties and responsibilities overlapped with those of others to have the stronger one do the job . 370 In this way Hitler fostered distrust competition and infighting among his subordinates to consolidate and maximise his own power. His cabinet never met after 1938 and he discouraged his ministers from meeting independently. 371 372 Hitler typically did not give written orders; instead he communicated verbally or had them conveyed through his close associate Martin Bormann . 373 He entrusted Bormann with his paperwork appointments and personal finances; Bormann used his position to control the flow of information and access to Hitler. 374 Hitler dominated his countrys war effort during World War II to a greater extent than any other national leader. He strengthened his control of the armed forces in 1938 and subsequently made all major decisions regarding Germanys military strategy. His decision to mount a risky series of offensives against Norway France and the Low Countries in 1940 against the advice of the military proved successful though the diplomatic and military strategies he employed in attempts to force the United Kingdom out of the war ended in failure. 375 Hitler deepened his involvement in the war effort by appointing himself commander-in-chief of the Army in December 1941; from this point forward he personally directed the war against the Soviet Union while his military commanders facing the Western Allies retained a degree of autonomy. 376 Hitlers leadership became increasingly disconnected from reality as the war turned against Germany with the militarys defensive strategies often hindered by his slow decision-making and frequent directives to hold untenable positions. Nevertheless he continued to believe that only his leadership could deliver victory. 375 In the final months of the war Hitler refused to consider peace negotiations regarding the destruction of Germany as preferable to surrender. 377 The military did not challenge Hitlers dominance of the war effort and senior officers generally supported and enacted his decisions. 378 Personal life Family Main article: Hitler family See also: Sexuality of Adolf Hitler Hitler and Braun in 1942 Hitler created a public image as a celibate man without a domestic life dedicated entirely to his political mission and the nation. 147 379 He met his lover Eva Braun in 1929 380 and married her on 29 April 1945 one day before they both committed suicide. 381 In September 1931 his half-niece Geli Raubal took her own life with Hitlers gun in his Munich apartment. It was rumoured among contemporaries that Geli was in a romantic relationship with him and her death was a source of deep lasting pain. 382 Paula Hitler the younger sister of Hitler and the last living member of his immediate family died in June 1960. 15 Views on religion Main article: Religious views of Adolf Hitler Hitler was born to a practising Catholic mother and an anti-clerical father; after leaving home Hitler never again attended Mass or received the sacraments . 383 384 385 Albert Speer states that Hitler railed against the church to his political associates and though he never officially left the church he had no attachment to it. 386 He adds that Hitler felt that in the absence of organised religion people would turn to mysticism which he considered regressive. 386 According to Speer Hitler believed that Japanese religious beliefs or Islam would have been a more suitable religion for Germans than Christianity with its meekness and flabbiness . 387 Historian John S. Conway states that Hitler was fundamentally opposed to the Christian churches. 388 According to Bullock Hitler did not believe in God was anticlerical and held Christian ethics in contempt because they contravened his preferred view of survival of the fittest . 389 He favoured aspects of Protestantism that suited his own views and adopted some elements of the Catholic Churchs hierarchical organisation liturgy and phraseology. 390 In a 1932 speech Hitler stated that he was not a Catholic and declared himself a German Christian . 391 In a conversation with Albert Speer Hitler said Through me the Evangelical Church could become the established church as in England. 392 Hitler shakes hands with Bishop Ludwig Muller in Germany in the 1930s Hitler viewed the church as an important politically conservative influence on society 393 and he adopted a strategic relationship with it that suited his immediate political purposes . 388 In public Hitler often praised Christian heritage and German Christian culture though professing a belief in an Aryan Jesus who fought against the Jews. 394 Any pro-Christian public rhetoric contradicted his private statements which described Christianity as absurdity 395 and nonsense founded on lies. 396 According to a US Office of Strategic Services OSS report The Nazi Master Plan Hitler planned to destroy the influence of Christian churches within the Reich. 397 398 His eventual goal was the total elimination of Christianity. 399 This goal informed Hitlers movement early on but he saw it as inexpedient to publicly express this extreme position. 400 According to Bullock Hitler wanted to wait until after the war before executing this plan. 401 Speer wrote that Hitler had a negative view of Himmlers and Alfred Rosenberg s mystical notions and Himmlers attempt to mythologise the SS. Hitler was more pragmatic and his ambitions centred on more practical concerns. 402 403 Health See also: Health of Adolf Hitler and Psychopathography of Adolf Hitler Researchers have variously suggested that Hitler suffered from irritable bowel syndrome skin lesions irregular heartbeat coronary sclerosis 404 Parkinsons disease 294 405 syphilis 405 giant-cell arteritis 406 tinnitus 407 and monorchism . 408 In a report prepared for the OSS in 1943 Walter Charles Langer of Harvard University described Hitler as a neurotic psychopath . 409 In his 1977 book The Psychopathic God: Adolf Hitler historian Robert G. L. Waite proposes that Hitler suffered from borderline personality disorder . 410 Historians Henrik Eberle and Hans-Joachim Neumann consider that while he suffered from a number of illnesses including Parkinsons disease Hitler did not experience pathological delusions and was always fully aware of and therefore responsible for his decisions. 411 313 Sometime in the 1930s Hitler adopted a mainly vegetarian diet 412 413 avoiding all meat and fish from 1942 onwards. At social events he sometimes gave graphic accounts of the slaughter of animals in an effort to make his guests shun meat. 414 Bormann had a greenhouse constructed near the Berghof near Berchtesgaden to ensure a steady supply of fresh fruit and vegetables for Hitler. 415 Hitler stopped drinking alcohol around the time he became vegetarian and thereafter only very occasionally drank beer or wine on social occasions. 416 417 He was a non-smoker for most of his adult life but smoked heavily in his youth 25 to 40 cigarettes a day; he eventually quit calling the habit a waste of money . 418 He encouraged his close associates to quit by offering a gold watch to anyone able to break the habit. 419 Hitler began using amphetamine occasionally after 1937 and became addicted to it in late 1942. 420 Speer linked this use of amphetamine to Hitlers increasingly erratic behaviour and inflexible decision-making for example rarely allowing military retreats. 421 Prescribed 90 medications during the war years by his personal physician Theodor Morell Hitler took many pills each day for chronic stomach problems and other ailments. 422 He regularly consumed amphetamine barbiturates opiates and cocaine 423 424 as well as potassium bromide and atropa belladonna the latter in the form of Doktor Kosters Antigaspills . 425 He suffered ruptured eardrums as a result of the 20 July plot bomb blast in 1944 and 200 wood splinters had to be removed from his legs. 426 Newsreel footage of Hitler shows tremors in his left hand and a shuffling walk which began before the war and worsened towards the end of his life. 422 Ernst-Gunther Schenck and several other doctors who met Hitler in the last weeks of his life also formed a diagnosis of Parkinsons disease. 427 Legacy Further information: Historiography of Adolf Hitler Consequences of Nazism and Neo-Nazism Outside of a building in Braunau am Inn Austria where Hitler was born is a memorial stone placed as a reminder of World War II. The inscription translates as: 428 For peace freedom and democracy never again fascism millions of dead warn us According to historian Joachim Fest Hitlers suicide was likened by numerous contemporaries to a spell being broken. 429 Similarly Speer commented in Inside the Third Reich on his emotions the day after Hitlers suicide: Only now was the spell broken the magic extinguished. 430 Public support for Hitler had collapsed by the time of his death which few Germans mourned; Kershaw argues that most civilians and military personnel were too busy adjusting to the collapse of the country or fleeing from the fighting to take any interest. 431 According to historian John Toland Nazism burst like a bubble without its leader. 432 Kershaw describes Hitler as the embodiment of modern political evil . 3 Never in history has such ruinationphysical and moralbeen associated with the name of one man he adds. 433 Hitlers political programme brought about a world war leaving behind a devastated and impoverished Eastern and Central Europe. Germany suffered wholesale destruction characterised as Stunde Null Zero Hour. 434 Hitlers policies inflicted human suffering on an unprecedented scale; 435 according to R. J. Rummel the Nazi regime was responsible for the democidal killing of an estimated 19.3 million civilians and prisoners of war. 352 In addition 28.7 million soldiers and civilians died as a result of military action in the European theatre of World War II . 352 The number of civilians killed during the Second World War was unprecedented in the history of warfare. 436 Historians philosophers and politicians often use the word evil to describe the Nazi regime. 437 Many European countries have criminalised both the promotion of Nazism and Holocaust denial . 438 Historian Friedrich Meinecke described Hitler as one of the great examples of the singular and incalculable power of personality in historical life . 439 English historian Hugh Trevor-Roper saw him as among the terrible simplifiers of history the most systematic the most historical the most philosophical and yet the coarsest cruelest least magnanimous conqueror the world has ever known . 440 For the historian John M. Roberts Hitlers defeat marked the end of a phase of European history dominated by Germany. 441 In its place emerged the Cold War a global confrontation between the Western Bloc dominated by the United States and other NATO nations and the Eastern Bloc dominated by the Soviet Union. 442 Historian Sebastian Haffner asserted that without Hitler and the displacement of the Jews the modern nation state of Israel would not exist. He contends that without Hitler the de-colonisation of former European spheres of influence would have been postponed. 443 Further Haffner claimed that other than Alexander the Great Hitler had a more significant impact than any other comparable historical figure in that he too caused a wide range of worldwide changes in a relatively short time span. 444 In propaganda See also: Adolf Hitler in popular culture and List of speeches given by Adolf Hitler Film of Hitler at Berchtesgaden c. 1941 Hitler exploited documentary films and newsreels to inspire a cult of personality . He was involved and appeared in a series of propaganda films throughout his political career many made by Leni Riefenstahl regarded as a pioneer of modern filmmaking. 445 Hitlers propaganda film appearances include: Der Sieg des Glaubens Victory of Faith 1933 Triumph des Willens Triumph of the Will 1935 Tag der Freiheit: Unsere Wehrmacht Day of Freedom: Our Armed Forces 1935 Olympia 1938 See also Bibliography of Adolf Hitler Fuhrermuseum Hitler and Mannerheim recording Julius Schaub chief aide Karl Mayr Hitlers superior in army intelligence 19191920 Karl Wilhelm Krause personal valet List of Adolf Hitlers personal staff List of streets named after Adolf Hitler Paintings by Adolf Hitler Toothbrush moustache also known as a Hitler moustache a style of facial hair Notes Pronunciation: German: adlf htl i Pronounced natsionalzotsialst dt abatpata i Officially the National Socialist German Workers Party German : Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei b or NSDAP The position of Fuhrer und Reichskanzler Leader and Chancellor replaced the position of President which was the head of state for the Weimar Republic . Hitler took this title after the death of Paul von Hindenburg who had been serving as President. He was afterwards both head of state and head of government with the full official title of Fuhrer und Reichskanzler des Deutschen Reiches und Volkes Fuhrer and Reich Chancellor of the German Reich and People . 1 2 The successor institution to the Realschule in Linz is Bundesrealgymnasium Linz Fadingerstrae . Hitler also won settlement from a libel suit against the socialist paper the Munchener Post which had questioned his lifestyle and income. Kershaw 2008 p. 99. MI5 Hitlers Last Days : Hitlers will and marriage on the website of MI5 using the sources available to Trevor-Roper a World War II MI5 agent and historianauthor of The Last Days of Hitler records the marriage as taking place after Hitler had dictated his last will and testament. For a summary of recent scholarship on Hitlers central role in the Holocaust see McMillan 2012 . Sir Richard Evans states it has become clear that the probable total is around 6 million. 354 Citations a b Shirer 1960 pp. 226227. a b Overy 2005 p. 63. a b Kershaw 2000b p. xvii. Bullock 1999 p. 24. Maser 1973 p. 4. Maser 1973 p. 15. a b Kershaw 1999 p. 5. Jetzinger 1976 p. 32. Rosenbaum 1999 p. 21. Hamann 2010 p. 50. Toland 1992 pp. 246247. Kershaw 1999 pp. 89. House of Responsibility . Bullock 1999 p. 23. a b Kershaw 2008 p. 4. Toland 1976 p. 6. Rosmus 2004 p. 33. Keller 2010 p. 15. Hamann 2010 pp. 78. Kubizek 2006 p. 37. Kubizek 2006 p. 92. Hitler 1999 p. 6. Fromm 1977 pp. 493498. Hamann 2010 pp. 1011. a b Diver 2005 . Shirer 1960 pp. 1011. Payne 1990 p. 22. Kershaw 2008 p. 9. Hitler 1999 p. 8. Keller 2010 pp. 3334. Fest 1977 p. 32. Kershaw 2008 p. 8. Hitler 1999 p. 10. Evans 2003 pp. 163164. Bendersky 2000 p. 26. Ryschka 2008 p. 35. Hamann 2010 p. 13. Kershaw 2008 p. 10. Kershaw 1999 p. 19. Kershaw 1999 p. 20. a b Hitler 1999 p. 20. Bullock 1962 pp. 3031. Bullock 1962 p. 31. Bullock 1999 pp. 3033. Hamann 2010 p. 157. Kershaw 1999 pp. 41 42. Shirer 1960 p. 26. Hamann 2010 pp. 243246. Nicholls 2000 pp. 236 237 274. Hamann 2010 p. 250. Hamann 2010 pp. 341345. Hamann 2010 p. 233. Britannica: Nazism . Pinkus 2005 p. 27. Kershaw 1999 pp. 6067. Shirer 1960 p. 25. Hamann 2010 p. 58. Hitler 1999 p. 52. Toland 1992 p. 45. Kershaw 1999 pp. 55 63. Hamann 2010 p. 174. Evans 2011 . Shirer 1960 p. 27. Weber 2010 p. 13. Kershaw 1999 p. 86. Kershaw 1999 p. 49. a b c Kershaw 1999 p. 90. Weber 2010 pp. 1213. Kershaw 2008 p. 53. Kershaw 2008 p. 54. Weber 2010 p. 100. a b c d Shirer 1960 p. 30. Kershaw 2008 p. 57. Kershaw 2008 p. 58. Steiner 1976 p. 392. Kershaw 2008 p. 59. Weber 2010a . Kershaw 2008 pp. 59 60. Kershaw 1999 pp. 97 102. Keegan 1987 pp. 238240. Bullock 1962 p. 60. Kershaw 2008 pp. 61 62. Kershaw 2008 pp. 6163. Kershaw 2008 p. 96. Kershaw 2008 pp. 80 90 92. Bullock 1999 p. 61. Kershaw 1999 p. 109. Kershaw 2008 p. 82. Evans 2003 p. 170. Kershaw 2008 pp. 75 76. Mitcham 1996 p. 67. Kershaw 1999 pp. 125126. Fest 1970 p. 21. Kershaw 2008 pp. 94 95 100. Kershaw 2008 p. 87. Kershaw 2008 p. 88. Kershaw 2008 p. 93. Kershaw 2008 p. 81. Kershaw 2008 p. 89. Kershaw 2008 pp. 8992. Kershaw 2008 pp. 100 101. Kershaw 2008 p. 102. a b Kershaw 2008 p. 103. Kershaw 2008 pp. 83 103. Kershaw 2000b p. xv. Bullock 1999 p. 376. Frauenfeld 1937 . Goebbels 1936 . Kershaw 2008 pp. 105106. Bullock 1999 p. 377. Kressel 2002 p. 121. Heck 2001 p. 23. Kellogg 2005 p. 275. Kellogg 2005 p. 203. Bracher 1970 pp. 115116. Kershaw 2008 p. 126. a b Kershaw 2008 p. 128. Kershaw 2008 p. 129. Kershaw 2008 pp. 130131. Shirer 1960 pp. 7374. Kershaw 2008 p. 132. Kershaw 2008 p. 131. Munich Court 1924 . Fulda 2009 pp. 6869. Kershaw 1999 p. 239. a b Bullock 1962 p. 121. Kershaw 2008 p. 147. Kershaw 2008 pp. 148150. Shirer 1960 pp. 8081. Kershaw 1999 p. 237. a b Kershaw 1999 p. 238. Kershaw 2008 pp. 158 161 162. Kershaw 2008 pp. 162 166. Shirer 1960 p. 129. Kershaw 2008 pp. 166 167. Shirer 1960 pp. 136137. Kolb 2005 pp. 224225. Kolb 1988 p. 105. Halperin 1965 p. 403 et. seq . Halperin 1965 pp. 434446 et. seq . Wheeler-Bennett 1967 p. 218. Wheeler-Bennett 1967 p. 216. Wheeler-Bennett 1967 pp. 218219. Wheeler-Bennett 1967 p. 222. Halperin 1965 p. 449 et. seq . Halperin 1965 pp. 434436 471. a b Shirer 1960 p. 130. Hinrichs 2007 . Halperin 1965 p. 476. Halperin 1965 pp. 468471. Bullock 1962 p. 201. Hoffman 1989 . Kershaw 2008 p. 227. Halperin 1965 pp. 477479. Letter to Hindenburg 1932 . Fox News 2003 . Shirer 1960 p. 184. Evans 2003 p. 307. Bullock 1962 p. 262. Shirer 1960 p. 192. Bullock 1999 p. 262. Kershaw 1999 pp. 456458 731732. Shirer 1960 pp. 194 274. Shirer 1960 p. 194. Bullock 1962 p. 265. City of Potsdam . Shirer 1960 pp. 196197. Shirer 1960 p. 198. Evans 2003 p. 335. Shirer 1960 p. 196. Bullock 1999 p. 269. Shirer 1960 p. 199. Time 1934 . a b Shirer 1960 p. 201. Shirer 1960 p. 202. a b Evans 2003 pp. 350374. Kershaw 2008 pp. 309314. Tames 2008 pp. 45. Kershaw 2008 pp. 313315. Evans 2005 p. 44. Shirer 1960 p. 229. Bullock 1962 p. 309. Evans 2005 p. 110. Kershaw 2008 pp. 392 393. Shirer 1960 p. 312. Kershaw 2008 pp. 393397. Shirer 1960 p. 308. Shirer 1960 pp. 318319. Kershaw 2008 pp. 397398. Shirer 1960 p. 274. Read 2004 p. 344. Evans 2005 pp. 109111. McNab 2009 p. 54. Shirer 1960 pp. 259260. Shirer 1960 p. 258. Shirer 1960 p. 262. McNab 2009 pp. 5457. Speer 1971 pp. 118119. Evans 2005 pp. 570572. Weinberg 1970 pp. 2627. Kershaw 1999 pp. 490491. Kershaw 1999 pp. 492 555556 586587. Carr 1972 p. 23. Kershaw 2008 p. 297. Shirer 1960 p. 283. Messerschmidt 1990 pp. 601602. Martin 2008 . Hildebrand 1973 p. 39. Roberts 1975 . Messerschmidt 1990 pp. 630631. a b Overy Origins of WWII Reconsidered 1999 . Carr 1972 pp. 5657. Goeschel 2018 pp. 6970. Messerschmidt 1990 p. 642. Aigner 1985 p. 264. a b Messerschmidt 1990 pp. 636637. Carr 1972 pp. 7378. Messerschmidt 1990 p. 638. a b Bloch 1992 pp. 178179. Plating 2011 p. 21. Butler Young 1989 p. 159. Bullock 1962 p. 434. Overy 2005 p. 425. Weinberg 1980 pp. 334335. Weinberg 1980 pp. 338340. Weinberg 1980 p. 366. Weinberg 1980 pp. 418419. Kee 1988 pp. 149150. Weinberg 1980 p. 419. Murray 1984 pp. 256260. Bullock 1962 p. 469. Overy The Munich Crisis 1999 p. 207. Kee 1988 pp. 202203. Weinberg 1980 pp. 462463. Messerschmidt 1990 p. 672. Messerschmidt 1990 pp. 671 682683. Rothwell 2001 pp. 9091. Time January 1939 . a b Murray 1984 p. 268. Evans 2005 p. 682. Murray 1984 pp. 268269. Shirer 1960 p. 448. Weinberg 1980 p. 562. Weinberg 1980 pp. 579581. a b Maiolo 1998 p. 178. a b Messerschmidt 1990 pp. 688690. a b Weinberg 1980 pp. 537539 557560. Weinberg 1980 p. 558. Carr 1972 pp. 7677. Kershaw 2000b pp. 3637 92. Weinberg 2010 p. 792. Robertson 1985 p. 212. Bloch 1992 p. 228. Overy Wheatcroft 1989 p. 56. Kershaw 2008 p. 497. Robertson 1963 pp. 181187. Evans 2005 p. 693. Bloch 1992 pp. 252253. Weinberg 1995 pp. 8594. Bloch 1992 pp. 255257. Weinberg 1980 pp. 561562 583584. Bloch 1992 p. 260. Hakim 1995 . a b c Rees 1997 pp. 141145. Kershaw 2008 p. 527. Welch 2001 pp. 8889. Rees 1997 pp. 148149. Winkler 2007 p. 74. Shirer 1960 pp. 696730. Kershaw 2008 p. 562. Deighton 2008 pp. 79. Ellis 1993 p. 94. Shirer 1960 pp. 731737. Shirer 1960 pp. 774782. Kershaw 2008 pp. 563 569 570. Kershaw 2008 p. 580. Roberts 2006 pp. 5860. Kershaw 2008 pp. 604605. Kurowski 2005 pp. 141142. Mineau 2004 p. 1. Glantz 2001 p. 9. Koch 1988 . Evans 2008 pp. 162163. a b Stolfi 1982 . Wilt 1981 . Evans 2008 p. 202. Evans 2008 p. 210. Shirer 1960 pp. 900901. a b Bauer 2000 p. 5. Shirer 1960 p. 921. Kershaw 2000b p. 417. Evans 2008 pp. 419420. Shirer 1960 p. 1006. a b BBC News 1999 . Shirer 1960 pp. 9961000. Shirer 1960 p. 1036. Speer 1971 pp. 513514. Kershaw 2008 pp. 544547 821822 827828. Kershaw 2008 pp. 816818. Shirer 1960 pp. 10481072. Plesch 2017 p. 158. Weinberg 1964 . a b Crandell 1987 . Bullock 1962 p. 778. Rees Kershaw 2012 . a b Bullock 1962 pp. 774775. Sereny 1996 pp. 497498. Bullock 1962 pp. 753 763 780781. Beevor 2002 p. 251. Beevor 2002 pp. 255256. Le Tissier 2010 p. 45. a b Dollinger 1995 p. 231. a b Jones 1989 . Beevor 2002 p. 275. Ziemke 1969 p. 92. Bullock 1962 p. 787. Bullock 1962 pp. 787 795. Butler Young 1989 pp. 227228. Kershaw 2008 pp. 923925 943. Bullock 1962 p. 791. Bullock 1962 pp. 792 795. Beevor 2002 p. 343. Bullock 1962 p. 798. Linge 2009 p. 199. Joachimsthaler 1999 pp. 160182. Linge 2009 p. 200. Bullock 1962 pp. 799800. Joachimsthaler 1999 pp. 217220 224225. Kershaw 2008 pp. 949950. Shirer 1960 p. 1136. Vinogradov 2005 pp. 111 333. Joachimsthaler 1999 pp. 215225. Fest 2004 pp. 163164. Kershaw 2000b p. 1110. Joachimsthaler 1999 pp. 813. Marrus 2000 p. 37. Gellately 1996 . a b c Snyder 2010 p. 416. Steinberg 1995 . Kershaw 2008 p. 683. Shirer 1960 p. 965. Naimark 2002 p. 81. Longerich 2005 p. 116. Megargee 2007 p. 146. a b Longerich Chapter 15 2003 . Longerich Chapter 17 2003 . Kershaw 2000b pp. 459462. Kershaw 2008 pp. 670675. Megargee 2007 p. 144. Kershaw 2008 p. 687. Evans 2008 map p. 366. a b c Rummel 1994 p. 112. a b Holocaust Memorial Museum . Evans 2008 p. 318. Hancock 2004 pp. 383396. a b Shirer 1960 p. 946. a b Evans 2008 p. 15. Snyder 2010 pp. 162163 416. Dorland 2009 p. 6. Rummel 1994 table p. 112 . US Holocaust Memorial Museum . Snyder 2010 p. 184. Niewyk Nicosia 2000 p. 45. Goldhagen 1996 p. 290. Downing 2005 p. 33. Gellately 2001 p. 216. Kershaw 1999 pp. 567568. Overy 2005 p. 252. Kershaw 2008 pp. 170 172 181. Speer 1971 p. 281. Manvell Fraenkel 2007 p. 29. Kershaw 2008 p. 323. Kershaw 2008 p. 377. Speer 1971 p. 333. a b Overy 2005a pp. 421425. Kershaw 2012 pp. 169170. Kershaw 2012 pp. 396397. Kershaw 2008 pp. 171395. Bullock 1999 p. 563. Kershaw 2008 p. 378. Kershaw 2008 pp. 947948. Bullock 1962 pp. 393394. Kershaw 2008 p. 5. Rimann 2001 pp. 9496. Toland 1992 pp. 910. a b Speer 1971 pp. 141142. Speer 1971 p. 143. a b Conway 1968 p. 3. Bullock 1999 pp. 385 389. Rimann 2001 p. 96. Weir Greenberg 2022 p. 694. Speer 1971 p. 142. Speer 1971 p. 141. Steigmann-Gall 2003 pp. 27 108. Hitler 2000 p. 59. Hitler 2000 p. 342. Sharkey 2002 . Bonney 2001 pp. 23. Phayer 2000 . Bonney 2001 p. 2. Bullock 1962 pp. 219 389. Speer 1971 pp. 141 171 174. Bullock 1999 p. 729. Evans 2008 p. 508. a b Bullock 1962 p. 717. Redlich 1993 . Redlich 2000 pp. 129190. The Guardian 2015 . Langer 1972 p. 126. Waite 1993 p. 356. Gunkel 2010 . Bullock 1999 p. 388. Toland 1992 p. 256. Wilson 1998 . McGovern 1968 pp. 3233. Linge 2009 p. 38. Hitler Trevor-Roper 1988 p. 176 22 January 1942. Proctor 1999 p. 219. Toland 1992 p. 741. Heston Heston 1980 pp. 125142. Heston Heston 1980 pp. 1120. a b Kershaw 2008 p. 782. Ghaemi 2011 pp. 190191. Porter 2013 . Doyle 2005 p. 8. Linge 2009 p. 156. ODonnell 2001 p. 37. Zialcita 2019 . Fest 1974 p. 753. Speer 1971 p. 617. Kershaw 2012 pp. 348350. Toland 1992 p. 892. Kershaw 2000b p. 841. Fischer 1995 p. 569. Del Testa Lemoine Strickland 2003 p. 83. Murray Millett 2001 p. 554. Welch 2001 p. 2. Bazyler 2006 p. 1. Shirer 1960 p. 6. Hitler Trevor-Roper 1988 p. xxxv. Roberts 1996 p. 501. Lichtheim 1974 p. 366. Haffner 1979 pp. 100101. Haffner 1979 p. 100. The Daily Telegraph 2003 . Bibliography Printed Aigner Dietrich 1985. Hitlers ultimate aims a programme of world dominion? . In Koch H. W. ed.. Aspects of the Third Reich . London: MacMillan. ISBN 978-0-312-05726-8 . Doyle D February 2005. Adolf Hitlers medical care . Journal of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh . 35 1: 7582. PMID 15825245 . Bauer Yehuda 2000. Rethinking the Holocaust . New Haven: Yale University Press. p. 5 . ISBN 978-0-300-08256-2 . Beevor Antony 2002. Berlin: The Downfall 1945 . London: Viking-Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-670-03041-5 . Bendersky Joseph W 2000. A History of Nazi Germany: 19191945 . Lanham: Rowman Littlefield. ISBN 978-1-4422-1003-5 . Bloch Michael 1992. Ribbentrop . New York: Crown Publishing. ISBN 978-0-517-59310-3 . Bonney Richard 2001. The Nazi Master Plan Annex 4: The Persecution of the Christian Churches PDF . Rutgers Journal of Law and Religion . Archived from the original PDF on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 19 April 2020 . Bracher Karl Dietrich 1970. The German Dictatorship . Translated by Jean Steinberg. New York: Penguin Books . ISBN 978-0-14-013724-8 . Bullock Alan 1962 1952. Hitler: A Study in Tyranny . London: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-013564-0 . Bullock Alan 1999 1952. Hitler: A Study in Tyranny . New York: Konecky Konecky. ISBN 978-1-56852-036-0 . Butler Ewan; Young Gordon 1989. The Life and Death of Hermann Goring . Newton Abbot Devon: David Charles . ISBN 978-0-7153-9455-7 . Carr William 1972. Arms Autarky and Aggression . London: Edward Arnold. ISBN 978-0-7131-5668-3 . Conway John S. 1968. The Nazi Persecution of the Churches 193345 . London: Weidenfeld Nicolson. ISBN 978-0-297-76315-4 . Crandell William F. 1987. Eisenhower the Strategist: The Battle of the Bulge and the Censure of Joe McCarthy . Presidential Studies Quarterly . 17 3: 487501. JSTOR 27550441 . Deighton Len 2008. Fighter: The True Story of the Battle of Britain . New York: Random House. ISBN 978-1-84595-106-1 . Del Testa David W; Lemoine Florence; Strickland John 2003. Government Leaders Military Rulers and Political Activists . Westport: Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 83. ISBN 978-1-57356-153-2 . Dollinger Hans 1995 1965. The Decline and Fall of Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan: A Pictorial History of the Final Days of World War II . New York: Gramercy. ISBN 978-0-517-12399-7 . Dorland Michael 2009. Cadaverland: Inventing a Pathology of Catastrophe for Holocaust Survival: The Limits of Medical Knowledge and Memory in France . Tauber Institute for the Study of European Jewry series. Waltham Mass: University Press of New England. ISBN 978-1-58465-784-2 . Downing David 2005. The Nazi Death Camps . World Almanac Library of the Holocaust. Pleasantville NY: Gareth Stevens. ISBN 978-0-8368-5947-8 . Ellis John 1993. World War II Databook: The Essential Facts and Figures for All the Combatants . London: Aurum. ISBN 978-1-85410-254-6 . Evans Richard J. 2003. The Coming of the Third Reich . New York: Penguin Books . ISBN 978-0-14-303469-8 . Evans Richard J. 2005. The Third Reich in Power . New York: Penguin Books . ISBN 978-0-14-303790-3 . Evans Richard J. 2008. The Third Reich At War . New York: Penguin Books . ISBN 978-0-14-311671-4 . Fest Joachim C. 1970. The Face of the Third Reich . London: Weidenfeld Nicolson. ISBN 978-0-297-17949-8 . Fest Joachim C. 1974 1973. Hitler . London: Weidenfeld Nicolson. ISBN 978-0-297-76755-8 . Fest Joachim C. 1977 1973. Hitler . Harmondsworth: Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-021983-8 . Fest Joachim 2004. Inside Hitlers Bunker: The Last Days of the Third Reich . New York: Farrar Straus and Giroux. ISBN 978-0-374-13577-5 . Fischer Klaus P. 1995. Nazi Germany: A New History . London: Constable and Company. ISBN 978-0-09-474910-8 . Fromm Erich 1977 1973. The Anatomy of Human Destructiveness . London: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-004258-0 . Fulda Bernhard 2009. Press and Politics in the Weimar Republic . Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-954778-4 . Gellately Robert 1996. Reviewed works: Vom Generalplan Ost zum Generalsiedlungsplan by Czeslaw Madajczyk. Der Generalplan Ost . Hauptlinien der nationalsozialistischen Planungs- und Vernichtungspolitik by Mechtild Rossler ; Sabine Schleiermacher . Central European History . 29 2: 270274. doi : 10.1017S0008938900013170 . ISSN 0008-9389 . Gellately Robert 2001. Social Outsiders in Nazi Germany . Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-08684-2 . Ghaemi Nassir 2011. A First-Rate Madness: Uncovering the Links Between Leadership and Mental Illness . New York: Penguin Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1-101-51759-8 . Goeschel Christian 2018. Mussolini and Hitler: The Forging of the Fascist Alliance . New Haven; London: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-17883-8 . Goldhagen Daniel 1996. Hitlers Willing Executioners: Ordinary Germans and the Holocaust . New York: Knopf. ISBN 978-0-679-44695-8 . Haffner Sebastian 1979. The Meaning of Hitler . Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-55775-8 . Hakim Joy 1995. War Peace and All That Jazz . A History of US . Vol. 9. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-509514-2 . Halperin Samuel William 1965 1946. Germany Tried Democracy: A Political History of the Reich from 1918 to 1933 . New York: W.W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-00280-5 . Hamann Brigitte 2010 1999. Hitlers Vienna: A Portrait of the Tyrant as a Young Man . Trans. Thomas Thornton. London; New York: Tauris Parke Paperbacks. ISBN 978-1-84885-277-8 . Hancock Ian 2004. Romanies and the Holocaust: A Reevaluation and an Overview . In Stone Dan ed.. The Historiography of the Holocaust . New York; Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-333-99745-1 . Heck Alfons 2001 1985. A Child of Hitler: Germany In The Days When God Wore A Swastika . Phoenix AZ: Renaissance House. ISBN 978-0-939650-44-6 . Heston Leonard L.; Heston Renate 1980 1979. The Medical Casebook of Adolf Hitler: His Illnesses Doctors and Drugs . New York: Stein and Day. ISBN 978-0-8128-2718-7 . Hildebrand Klaus 1973. The Foreign Policy of the Third Reich . London: Batsford. ISBN 978-0-7134-1126-3 . Hitler Adolf 1999 1925. Mein Kampf . Trans. Ralph Manheim . Boston: Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-395-92503-4 . Hitler Adolf; Trevor-Roper Hugh 1988 1953. Hitlers Table-Talk 19411945: Hitlers Conversations Recorded by Martin Bormann . Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-285180-2 . Hitler Adolf 2000 19411944. Hitlers Table Talk 19411944 . London: Enigma. ISBN 978-1-929631-05-6 . Jetzinger Franz 1976 1956. Hitlers Youth . Westport Conn: Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-8371-8617-7 . Joachimsthaler Anton 1999 1995. The Last Days of Hitler: The Legends the Evidence the Truth . Trans. Helmut Bogler. London: Brockhampton Press. ISBN 978-1-86019-902-8 . Kee Robert 1988. Munich: The Eleventh Hour . London: Hamish Hamilton. ISBN 978-0-241-12537-3 . Keegan John 1987. The Mask of Command: A Study of Generalship . London: Pimlico. ISBN 978-0-7126-6526-1 . Keller Gustav 2010. Der Schuler Adolf Hitler: die Geschichte eines lebenslangen Amoklaufs The Student Adolf Hitler: The Story of a Lifelong Rampage in German. Munster: LIT. ISBN 978-3-643-10948-4 . Kellogg Michael 2005. The Russian Roots of Nazism White Emigres and the Making of National Socialism 19171945 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-84512-0 . Kershaw Ian 1999 1998. Hitler: 18891936: Hubris . New York: W. W. Norton Company . ISBN 978-0-393-04671-7 . Kershaw Ian 2000b. Hitler 19361945: Nemesis . New York; London: W. W. Norton Company. ISBN 978-0-393-32252-1 . Kershaw Ian 2008. Hitler: A Biography . New York: W. W. Norton Company. ISBN 978-0-393-06757-6 . Kershaw Ian 2012. The End: Hitlers Germany 194445 Paperback ed.. London: Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-101421-0 . Koch H. W. June 1988. Operation Barbarossa The Current State of the Debate . The Historical Journal . 31 2: 377390. doi : 10.1017S0018246X00012930 . S2CID 159848116 . Kolb Eberhard 2005 1984. The Weimar Republic . London; New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-34441-8 . Kolb Eberhard 1988 1984. The Weimar Republic . New York: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-09077-3 . Kressel Neil J. 2002. Mass Hate: The Global Rise Of Genocide And Terror . Boulder: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-8133-3951-1 . Kubizek August 2006 1953. The Young Hitler I Knew . St. Paul MN: MBI. ISBN 978-1-85367-694-9 . Kurowski Franz 2005. The Brandenburger Commandos: Germanys Elite Warrior Spies in World War II . Stackpole Military History series. Mechanicsburg PA: Stackpole Books. ISBN 978-0-8117-3250-5 . Langer Walter C. 1972 1943. The Mind of Adolf Hitler: The Secret Wartime Report . New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-04620-1 . Lichtheim George 1974. Europe In The Twentieth Century . London: Sphere Books. ISBN 978-0-351-17192-5 . Linge Heinz 2009 1980. With Hitler to the End: The Memoirs of Adolf Hitlers Valet . Intro. Roger Moorhouse . New York: Skyhorse Publishing. ISBN 978-1-60239-804-7 . Longerich Peter 2005. The Unwritten Order: Hitlers Role in the Final Solution . History Press. ISBN 978-0-7524-3328-8 . Maiolo Joseph 1998. The Royal Navy and Nazi Germany 193339: Appeasement and the Origins of the Second World War . London: Macmillan Press. ISBN 978-0-333-72007-3 . Manvell Roger ; Fraenkel Heinrich 2007 1965. Heinrich Himmler: The Sinister Life of the Head of the SS and Gestapo . London; New York: Greenhill; Skyhorse. ISBN 978-1-60239-178-9 . Maser Werner 1973. Hitler: Legend Myth Reality . London: Allen Lane. ISBN 978-0-7139-0473-4 . Marrus Michael 2000. The Holocaust in History . Toronto: Key Porter. ISBN 978-0-299-23404-1 . McGovern James 1968. Martin Bormann . New York: William Morrow. OCLC 441132 . McNab Chris 2009. The Third Reich . London: Amber Books. ISBN 978-1-906626-51-8 . Megargee Geoffrey P. 2007. War of Annihilation: Combat and Genocide on the Eastern Front 1941 . Lanham Md: Rowman Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-4482-6 . Messerschmidt Manfred 1990. Foreign Policy and Preparation for War . In Deist Wilhelm ed.. Germany and the Second World War . Vol. 1. Oxford: Clarendon Press. ISBN 978-0-19-822866-0 . Mitcham Samuel W. 1996. Why Hitler?: The Genesis of the Nazi Reich . Westport Conn: Praeger. ISBN 978-0-275-95485-7 . Mineau Andre 2004. Operation Barbarossa: Ideology and Ethics Against Human Dignity . Amsterdam; New York: Rodopi. ISBN 978-90-420-1633-0 . Murray Williamson 1984. The Change in the European Balance of Power . Princeton: Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-05413-1 . Murray Williamson; Millett Allan R. 2001 2000. A War to be Won: Fighting the Second World War . Cambridge MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-00680-5 . Naimark Norman M. 2002. Fires of Hatred: Ethnic Cleansing in Twentieth-Century Europe . Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-00994-3 . Nicholls David 2000. Adolf Hitler: A Biographical Companion . University of North Carolina Press. ISBN 978-0-87436-965-6 . Niewyk Donald L.; Nicosia Francis R. 2000. The Columbia Guide to the Holocaust . New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-11200-0 . ODonnell James P. 2001 1978. The Bunker . New York: Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-80958-3 . Overy Richard ; Wheatcroft Andrew 1989. The Road To War . London: Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-14-028530-7 . Overy Richard 1999. Germany and the Munich Crisis: A Mutilated Victory? . In Lukes Igor; Goldstein Erik eds.. The Munich Crisis 1938: Prelude to World War II . London; Portland OR: Frank Cass. OCLC 40862187 . Overy Richard 1999. Misjudging Hitler . In Martel Gordon ed.. The Origins of the Second World War Reconsidered . London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-16324-8 . Overy Richard 2005. The Dictators: Hitlers Germany Stalins Russia . London: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-393-02030-4 . Overy Richard 2005. Hitler As War Leader . In Dear I. C. B.; Foot M. R. D. eds.. Oxford Companion to World War II . Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-280670-3 . Payne Robert 1990 1973. The Life and Death of Adolf Hitler . New York: Hippocrene Books. ISBN 978-0-88029-402-7 . Pinkus Oscar 2005. The War Aims and Strategies of Adolf Hitler . McFarland Company. ISBN 978-0-7864-2054-4 . Plating John D. 2011. The Hump: Americas Strategy for Keeping China in World War II . Williams-Ford Texas AM University military history series no. 134. College Station: Texas AM University Press. ISBN 978-1-60344-238-1 . Plesch Daniel 2017. Human Rights After Hitler: The Lost History of Prosecuting Axis War Crimes . Georgetown University Press. ISBN 978-1-62616-431-4 . Proctor Robert 1999. The Nazi War on Cancer . Princeton New Jersey: Princeton University Press . ISBN 978-0-691-07051-3 . Read Anthony 2004. The Devils Disciples: The Lives and Times of Hitlers Inner Circle . London: Pimlico. ISBN 978-0-7126-6416-5 . Redlich Fritz R. 2000. Hitler: Diagnosis of a Destructive Prophet . New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-513631-9 . Rees Laurence 1997. The Nazis: A Warning from History . New York: New Press. ISBN 978-0-563-38704-6 . Rimann Michael 2001. Hitlers Gott. Vorsehungsglaube und Sendungsbewutsein des deutschen Diktators in German. Zurich Munchen: Pendo. ISBN 978-3-85842-421-1 . Roberts G. 2006. Stalins Wars: From World War to Cold War 19391953 . New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-11204-7 . Roberts J. M. 1996. A History of Europe . Oxford: Helicon. ISBN 978-1-85986-178-3 . Roberts Martin 1975. The New Barbarism A Portrait of Europe 19001973 . London: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-913225-6 . Robertson Esmonde M. 1963. Hitlers Pre-War Policy and Military Plans: 19331939 . London: Longmans. OCLC 300011871 . Robertson E. M. 1985. Hitler Planning for War and the Response of the Great Powers . In H. W. Koch ed.. Aspects of the Third Reich . London: Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-312-05726-8 . Rosenbaum Ron 1999. Explaining Hitler: The Search for the Origins of His Evil . London: Harper Perennial. ISBN 978-0-06-095339-3 . Rosmus Anna Elisabeth 2004. Out of Passau: Leaving a City Hitler Called Home . Columbia S.C: University of South Carolina Press. ISBN 978-1-57003-508-1 . Rothwell Victor 2001. The Origins of the Second World War . Manchester: Manchester University Press. ISBN 978-0-7190-5957-5 . Rummel Rudolph 1994. Death by Government . New Brunswick NJ: Transaction. ISBN 978-1-56000-145-4 . Ryschka Birgit 2008. Constructing and Deconstructing National Identity: Dramatic Discourse in Tom Murphys the Patriot Game and Felix Mitterers in Der Lowengrube . Frankfurt am Main; New York: Peter Lang. ISBN 978-3-631-58111-7 . Sereny Gitta 1996 1995. Albert Speer: His Battle With Truth . New York; Toronto: Vintage. ISBN 978-0-679-76812-8 . Shirer William L. 1960. The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich . New York: Simon Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-62420-0 . Snyder Timothy 2010. Bloodlands: Europe Between Hitler and Stalin . New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-00239-9 . Speer Albert 1971 1969. Inside the Third Reich . New York: Avon. ISBN 978-0-380-00071-5 . Steigmann-Gall Richard 2003. The Holy Reich: Nazi Conceptions of Christianity 19191945 . Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-82371-5 . Steinberg Jonathan June 1995. The Third Reich Reflected: German Civil Administration in the Occupied Soviet Union 19414 . The English Historical Review . 110 437: 620651. doi : 10.1093ehrCX.437.620 . OCLC 83655937 . Steiner John Michael 1976. Power Politics and Social Change in National Socialist Germany: A Process of Escalation into Mass Destruction . The Hague: Mouton. ISBN 978-90-279-7651-2 . Stolfi Russel March 1982. Barbarossa Revisited: A Critical Reappraisal of the Opening Stages of the Russo-German Campaign JuneDecember 1941 PDF . The Journal of Modern History . 54 1: 2746. doi : 10.1086244076 . hdl : 1094544218 . S2CID 143690841 . Archived from the original PDF on 10 February 2020. Tames Richard 2008. Dictatorship . Chicago: Heinemann Library. ISBN 978-1-4329-0234-6 . Le Tissier Tony 2010 1999. Race for the Reichstag . Barnsley: Pen Sword. ISBN 978-1-84884-230-4 . Toland John 1976. Adolf Hitler . New York; Toronto: Ballantine Books. ISBN 978-0-345-25899-1 . Toland John 1992 1976. Adolf Hitler . New York: Anchor Books. ISBN 978-0-385-42053-2 . Vinogradov V. K. 2005. Hitlers Death: Russias Last Great Secret from the Files of the KGB . London: Chaucer Press. ISBN 978-1-904449-13-3 . Waite Robert G. L. 1993 1977. The Psychopathic God: Adolf Hitler . New York: Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-80514-1 . Weber Thomas 2010. Hitlers First War: Adolf Hitler The Men of the List Regiment and the First World War . Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-923320-5 . Weinberg Gerhard December 1964. Hitlers Image of the United States . The American Historical Review . 69 4: 10061021. doi : 10.23071842933 . JSTOR 1842933 . Weinberg Gerhard 1970. The Foreign Policy of Hitlers Germany Diplomatic Revolution in Europe 19331936 . Chicago Illinois: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-88509-4 . Weinberg Gerhard 1980. The Foreign Policy of Hitlers Germany Starting World War II . Chicago Illinois: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-88511-7 . Weinberg Gerhard 1995. Hitler and England 19331945: Pretense and Reality . Germany Hitler and World War II: Essays in Modern German and World History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-47407-8 . Weinberg Gerhard 2010 2005. Hitlers Foreign Policy 19331939: The Road to World War II . New York: Enigma. ISBN 978-1-929631-91-9 . Weir Todd H.; Greenberg Udi 2022. Religious Cultures and Confessional Politics . In Rossol Nadine; Ziemann Benjamin eds.. The Oxford Handbook of the Weimar Republic . Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-884577-5 . Welch David 2001. Hitler: Profile of a Dictator . London: Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-25075-7 . Wheeler-Bennett John 1967. The Nemesis of Power . London: Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-4039-1812-3 . Wilt Alan December 1981. Hitlers Late Summer Pause in 1941 . Military Affairs . 45 4: 187191. doi : 10.23071987464 . JSTOR 1987464 . Winkler Heinrich August 2007. Germany: The Long Road West. Vol. 2 19331990 . Sager Alexander trans.. New York: Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-926598-5 . Ziemke Earl F. 1969. Battle for Berlin: End of the Third Reich . Ballantines Illustrated History of World War II. Vol. Battle Book 6. London: Ballantine Books . OCLC 23899 . Online 1933 Day of Potsdam . Landeshauptstadt Potsdam . December 2004. Archived from the original on 6 June 2012 . Retrieved 13 June 2011 . Bazyler Michael J. 25 December 2006. Holocaust Denial Laws and Other Legislation Criminalizing Promotion of Nazism PDF . Yad Vashem. The World Holocaust Remembrance Center . Retrieved 7 January 2013 . Nazism . Britannica . Archived from the original on 28 February 2024. Der Hitler-Proze vor dem Volksgericht in Munchen The Hitler Trial Before the Peoples Court in Munich in German 1924 Diver Krysia 4 August 2005. Journal reveals Hitlers dysfunctional family . The Guardian . Retrieved 23 May 2018 . Documents: Bushs Grandfather Directed Bank Tied to Man Who Funded Hitler . Fox News . Associated Press. 17 October 2003. Archived from the original on 24 November 2014 . Retrieved 1 December 2014 . Eingabe der Industriellen an Hindenburg vom November 1932 Letter of the industrialists to Hindenburg November 1932. GlasnostArchiv in German . Retrieved 16 October 2011 . Evans Richard J. 22 June 2011. Hitlers First War by Thomas Weber . The Globe and Mail . Phillip Crawley . Retrieved 19 April 2020 . Frauenfeld A. E August 1937. The Power of Speech . German Propaganda Archive . Calvin College . Retrieved 1 December 2014 . Germany: Second Revolution? . Time . 2 July 1934. Archived from the original on 17 April 2008 . Retrieved 15 April 2013 . Glantz David 11 October 2001 The Soviet-German War 194145: Myths and Realities: A Survey Essay Clemson SC: Strom Thurmond Institute of Government and Public Affairs Clemson University archived from the original PDF on 22 July 2017 retrieved 12 June 2017 Goebbels Joseph 1936 The Fuhrer as a Speaker Calvin College retrieved 1 December 2014 Gunkel Christoph 4 February 2010. Medicating a Madman: A Sober Look at Hitlers Health . Spiegel Online International . Retrieved 12 December 2013 . Hinrichs Per 10 March 2007. Des Fuhrers Pass: Hitlers Einburgerung The Fuhrers Passport: Hitlers Naturalisation. Spiegel Online in German . Retrieved 1 December 2014 . Hitlers Last Days . mi5.gov.uk . MI5 Security Service . Retrieved 19 April 2020 . Hoffman David creator writer 1989. How Hitler Lost the War television documentary. US: Varied Directions . Retrieved 19 April 2020 . Introduction to the Holocaust . Holocaust Encyclopedia . United States Holocaust Memorial Museum . Retrieved 19 April 2020 . Jones Bill creator director 1989. The Fatal Attraction of Adolf Hitler television documentary. England: BBC . Retrieved 27 April 2016 . Kotanko Florian. House of Responsibility . House of Responsibility Braunau am Inn . HRB News. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020 . Retrieved 19 April 2020 . Leni Riefenstahl . The Daily Telegraph . London. 10 September 2003. ISSN 0307-1235 . OCLC 49632006 . Retrieved 10 May 2013 . Longerich Heinz Peter 2003. Hitlers Role in the Persecution of the Jews by the Nazi Regime . Holocaust Denial on Trial . Atlanta: Emory University. 15. Hitler and the Mass Shootings of Jews During the War Against Russia. Archived from the original on 22 July 2012 . Retrieved 31 July 2013 . Longerich Heinz Peter 2003. Hitlers Role in the Persecution of the Jews by the Nazi Regime . Holocaust Denial on Trial . Atlanta: Emory University. 17. Radicalisation of the Persecution of the Jews by Hitler at the Turn of the Year 19411942. Archived from the original on 9 July 2009 . Retrieved 31 July 2013 . Man of the Year . Time . 2 January 1939. Archived from the original on 18 April 2019 . Retrieved 31 December 2019 . Martin Jonathan creator writer 2008. World War II In HD Colour television documentary. US: World Media Rights. Archived from the original on 28 February 2015 . Retrieved 27 August 2014 . McMillan Dan October 2012. Review of Fritz Stephen G. Ostkrieg: Hitlers War of Extermination in the East . H-Genocide H-Net Reviews . Retrieved 16 October 2012 . Parkinsons part in Hitlers downfall . BBC News . 29 July 1999 . Retrieved 13 June 2011 . Phayer Michael 2000. The Response of the Catholic Church to National Socialism PDF . The Churches and Nazi Persecution . Yad Vashem. Archived from the original PDF on 20 January 2019 . Retrieved 22 May 2013 . Poles: Victims of the Nazi Era: The Invasion and Occupation of Poland . ushmm.org . United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. Archived from the original on 3 March 2013 . Retrieved 1 December 2014 . Porter Tom 24 August 2013. Adolf Hitler Took Cocktail of Drugs Reveal New Documents . IB Times . Retrieved 22 November 2015 . Redlich Fritz C. 22 March 1993. A New Medical Diagnosis of Adolf Hitler: Giant Cell ArteritisTemporal Arteritis . Arch Intern Med . 153 6: 693697. doi : 10.1001archinte.1993.00410060005001 . PMID 8447705 . Rees Laurence writer director Kershaw Ian writer consultant 2012. The Dark Charisma of Adolf Hitler television documentary. UK: BBC . Retrieved 6 September 2014 . Sharkey Joe 13 January 2002. Word for WordThe Case Against the Nazis; How Hitlers Forces Planned To Destroy German Christianity . The New York Times . Retrieved 7 June 2011 . Staff 19 December 2015. Hitler really did have only one testicle German researcher claims . The Guardian . Retrieved 14 June 2022 . Weber Thomas 2010a. New Evidence Uncovers Hitlers Real First World War Story . BBC History Magazine . UK: Immediate Media Company. Archived from the original on 21 November 2012 . Retrieved 19 November 2016 . Wilson Bee 9 October 1998. Mein Diat Adolf Hitlers diet . New Statesman . UK. Archived from the original on 13 December 2013. Zialcita Paolo 2019. Hitlers Birth Home In Austria Will Become A Police Station . NPR . Retrieved 29 May 2020 . External links Listen to this article 1 hour and 43 minutes This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 12 October 2021 2021-10-12 and does not reflect subsequent edits. Audio help More spoken articles A psychological analysis of Adolf Hitler at the Internet Archive Works by Adolf Hitler at Open Library Works by or about Adolf Hitler at the Internet Archive Newspaper clippings about Adolf Hitler in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW v t e Adolf Hitler Politics Fuhrer Fuhrerprinzip Political views Political directives List Speeches Prophecy Mein Kampf in Arabic in English Zweites Buch Last will and testament Books Nazism Events Military career Rise to power Hitler cabinet Nazi Germany World War II The Holocaust Assassination attempts Death conspiracy theories Places of residence Fuhrer Headquarters Berghof Kehlsteinhaus Reich Chancellery Fuhrerbunker Vorbunker Adlerhorst Anlage Sud Felsennest Tannenberg Werwolf Wolfs Lair Wolfsschlucht I Wolfsschlucht II Special train Fuhrersonderzug Civilian residences Braunau am Inn Linz Vienna Meldemannstrae dormitory Munich 16 Prinzregentenplatz Obersalzberg Kampfhausl Personal life Health possible monorchism Wealth and income Religious views Sexuality Vegetarianism Staff Bodyguard August Kubizek Stefanie Rabatsch Reinhold Hanisch Psychopathography Hitlers Table Talk Paintings 50th birthday German naturalization Personal belongings Hitlers Globe Private library Perceptions Books Cult of personality In popular culture Killing baby Hitler The Victory of Faith Triumph of the Will Hitler: The Last Ten Days The Meaning of Hitler Hitler Diaries Moloch Hitler: The Rise of Evil Downfall Shigeru Mizukis Hitler Apocalypse: Hitler Family Eva Braun wife Alois Hitler father Klara Hitler mother Johann Georg Hiedler grandfather Maria Schicklgruber grandmother Angela Hitler half-sister Paula Hitler sister Leo Rudolf Raubal Jr. half-nephew Geli Raubal half-niece William Stuart-Houston half-nephew Heinz Hitler half-nephew Jean-Marie Loret possible illegitimate son Blondi dog Other Streets named after Hitler Mannerheim recording Category Offices and positions of Adolf Hitler Political offices Preceded by Kurt von Schleicher Chancellor of Germany 1 19331945 Succeeded by Joseph Goebbels Preceded by Paul von Hindenburg as President Fuhrer of Germany 1 19341945 Succeeded by Karl Donitz as President Party political offices Preceded by Anton Drexler as Chairman Fuhrer of the National Socialist German Workers Party 19211945 Succeeded by Martin Bormann as Party Minister Preceded by Franz Pfeffer von Salomon Supreme SA Leader 19301945 Position abolished Position established Supreme Leader of the SS 19341945 Military offices Preceded by Paul von Hindenburg as Supreme Commander of the Reichswehr Supreme Commander of the Wehrmacht 19341945 Succeeded by Karl Donitz Preceded by Walther von Brauchitsch Supreme Commander of the German Army 19411945 Succeeded by Ferdinand Schorner Honorary titles Preceded by Chiang Kai-shek and Soong Mei-ling Time Person of the Year 1938 Succeeded by Joseph Stalin Notes and references 1. The positions of Head of State and Government were combined 19341945 in the office of Fuhrer and Chancellor of Germany Links to related articles v t e Fascism Themes Core tenets Actual idealism Aestheticization of politics Anti-communism Anti-intellectualism Anti-materialism Anti-pacifism Authoritarianism Chauvinism Class collaboration Conspiracism Corporatism Cult of personality Dictatorship Direct action Dirigisme Economic interventionism Eugenics Heroic capitalism Heroic realism Heroism Imperialism Indoctrination Irrationalism Machismo Masculinity Militarism National syndicalism Nationalism Integral Palingenetic Ultra New Man One-party state Perpetual war Populism Proletarian nation Propaganda Racism Reactionary modernism Social Darwinism Social interventionism Social order State capitalism Statolatry Supercapitalism Syncretism Third Position Totalitarianism Topics Definitions Economics Fascism and ideology Fascism worldwide Symbolism Variants Arab Argentine Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Austrian Banderism Brazilian British Christian Christian Identity Clerical Crypto Eco Falangism French Doriotism Petainism Neo-Petainism Jeune Nation Luvre Francaise Valoisism Hindutva Hungarism Hutu Ilminism Irish Islamic Ziaism Italian Intransigent Japanese Reform bureaucratism Statism Restoration Jewish Kahanism Revisionist Maximalism LaRoucheism Latvian Mystical Nazism Austrian Esoteric Hitlerism Neo-Nazism Russian Strasserism Swedish Neo Finnish Pan-Turkic Rexism Romanian Legionarism Neo-Legionarism RomanianismStelism Russian Neo-Eurasianism Syndicalist Syrian Social Nationalism Techno Third Positionism National-anarchism National Bolshevism Nazi-Maoism Uruguayan Marzism Revisionism Sosism Ustasism Movements Africa Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging Greyshirts Muslim Association of the Lictor Ossewabrandwag Young Egypt Party 1933 Asia Abhinav Bharat Al-Muthanna Club Aria Party Azerbaijan National Democrat Party Azure Party Black Dragon Society Brit HaBirionim Concordia Association Grey Wolves Golden Square Hindu Mahasabha Iran-e-No Party Jewish National Front Kach Kataeb Party Kenkokukai Kokumin Domei Korea Nationalist Party Korean National Youth Association Lehi Liberal Party South Korea Nasyonal Aktivite ve Zinde Inkisaf National Socialism Association National Socialist Japanese Workers Party Nationalist Movement Party Nationalist Task Party National Will Party Nation Party of Iran New Life Movement Otzma Yehudit Pan-Iranist Party Palestine Arab Party Patrol 36 Progress Party Iran Philippine Falange Rastakhiz Party Rastriya Prajatantra Party Reform bureaucrats Religious Zionist Party Sakurakai Sangh Parivar Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad Bharatiya Gau Raksha Dal Bharatiya Janata Party Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha Bharatiya Jana Sangh Bharatiya Kisan Sangh Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh Bharat Vikas Parishad Ekal Vidyalaya Hindu Makkal Katchi Hindu Munnani Hindu Swayamsevak Sangh Jammu Praja Parishad Muslim Rashtriya Manch Ram Janmabhoomi Nyas Rashtra Sevika Samiti Rashtriya Sikh Sangat Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh Akhil Bharatiya Itihas Sankalan Yojana Seva Bharati Vidya Bharati Vanavasi Kalyan Ashram Vishva Hindu Parishad Bajrang Dal Durga Vahini SUMKA Syrian Social Nationalist Party Tohokai Tsagaan Khas Turkish Union Party Wang Jingwei Kuomintang Northern Northwestern Europe Academic Karelia Society Ailtiri na hAiseirghe Autonome Nationalisten Bases Autonomas Black Front Netherlands Blood Honour Blueshirts Breton Social-National Workers Movement British Democratic Party British Fascists Britain First British League of Ex-Servicemen and Women British Movement British National Party 1960 British National Party British Peoples Party 1939 British Peoples Party 2005 British Union of Fascists The Britons La Cagoule Casuals United Centre Party 86 Clerical Peoples Party Dutch Fascist Union English Defence League English National Association European Liberation Front Le Faisceau Federation daction nationale et europeenne Finnish National Socialist Labor Organisation Finnish Peoples Organisation Finnish-Socialist Workers Party Flemish National Union French National-Collectivist Party French Nationalist Party French Popular Party General Dutch Fascist League Greater Britain Movement Groupe Collaboration Heathen Front Imperial Fascist League International Third Position Jeune Nation Lalli Alliance of Finland Lapua Movement League of Saint George Les Identitaires Mouvement dAction Civique Mouvement Franciste Nasjonal Samling National Action UK National Alliance Sweden National Corporate Party National Fascisti National Front UK National League of Sweden Nationalist Party National Popular Rally National Rally National Socialist Bloc National Socialist Dutch Workers Party National Socialist Front National Socialist League National Socialist Movement UK 1962 National Socialist Movement United Kingdom National Socialist Movement in the Netherlands National Socialist Movement of Norway National Socialist Union of Finland National Socialist Workers Party Sweden National Socialist Workers Party of Denmark National Socialists of Finland National Syndicalists National Union Netherlands National Union Portugal New Party Nipsters Nordic League The Nordic Realm Party Nordic Resistance Movement Northern League Norwegian Defence League Nouvelle Droite GRECE Luvre Francaise Official National Front Order of Flemish Militants Order of Nine Angles Organisation of National Socialists Parti Communautaire National-Europeen Party of Finnish Labor Party of the Swedes Patriotic Alternative Patriotic Peoples Movement Patriotic Peoples Movement 1993 Perkonkrusts Phalange Francaise Rexist Party Rising Finland Scottish Democratic Fascist Party Scottish Protestant League Stormers Terre et Peuple Third Way France Third Way UK Union Movement Verdinaso Vigrid White Aryan Resistance World Union of National Socialists Central Europe Action Front of National SocialistsNational Activists Arrow Cross Party Artgemeinschaft Austrian Nazism Black Front Germany Bund Deutscher Osten Christian National Socialist Front Deutsche Reichspartei Eidgenossische Sammlung Free German Workers Party German Faith Movement German National Movement in Liechtenstein German National Socialist Workers Party Czechoslovakia German Social Union Hungarian National Front Hungarian National Socialist Agricultural Labourers and Workers Party Hungarian National Socialist Party Kampfbund Deutscher Sozialisten Liechtenstein Homeland Service National Democratic Party Austria National Democratic Party of Germany National Front Hungary National Front Switzerland National Movement of Switzerland National Radical Camp National Radical Camp 1993 National Revival of Poland National Union Switzerland Nationalist Front Germany Nazi Party Greater German Peoples Community Nazi Germany National Socialist Freedom Movement National Socialist Working Association New Order Nipsters Positive Christianity German Christians The Right Germany Socialist Reich Party Sudeten German Party The Third Path United Hungarian National Socialist Party Volksdeutsche Bewegung Volkssozialistische Bewegung DeutschlandsPartei der Arbeit Wiking-Jugend Southern Europe ADNSpanish Identity Albanian Fascist Party Balli Kombetar Brothers of Italy CEDADE Democratic Fascist Party European Nation State Fasci dAzione Rivoluzionaria Fasci Italiani di Combattimento Fascio dAzione Rivoluzionaria Falange Seccion Femenina La Falange 1999 Falange Autentica Falange Espanola Falange Espanola Autentica Falange Espanola de las JONS Falange Espanola de las JONS 1976 Falange Espanola Independiente Falangist Movement of Spain Freethinkers Party Imperium Europa Italian fascism National Fascist Party Italy Italian Social Republic Republican Fascist Party Italian Social Movement Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional-Sindicalista Juntas Espanolas National Alliance Spain National Alliance July 18 National Democracy Italy National Democracy Spain National Front Spain 1986 National Front Spain 2006 National Union Italy 1923 National Union Spain New Force Italy New Force Spain Republican Social Movement The Right Italy Sammarinese Fascist Party Spanish Military Union Struggle of the People Student Action Terza Posizione Tricolour Flame Unidad Falangista Montanesa Youth Front Eastern and Southeastern Europe Autochthonous Croatian Party of Rights Bosnian Movement of National Pride Bulgarian National Socialist Workers Party Croatian Liberation Movement Croatian National Resistance Croatian Party of Rights Crusade of Romanianism Ethnic National Union Eurasia Movement Eurasia Party Falanga Format18 For the Native Language! Front of National Revolutionary Action German Party German Peoples Party Golden Dawn Greek National Socialist Party Hosank Iron Guard LEPEN Liberal Democratic Party of Russia Lithuanian Nationalist Union National Agrarian Party National Bolshevik Front National Bolshevik Party National-Christian Defense League National Christian Party National Fascist Community National Fascist Movement National Italo-Romanian Cultural and Economic Movement National Party Greeks National Socialist Patriotic Organisation National Socialist Society National Social Movement National Radical Camp National Romanian Fascio National Renaissance Front National Salvation Front National Socialism White Power Occupy Pedophilia Order of Nine Angles Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists The Other Russia of E. V. Limonov Pamyat Patriotic Alliance Peoples Party Progressive Socialist Party of Ukraine Ratniks Bulgaria Romanian Front Russian Imperial Movement Russian Fascist Party Russian National Unity Russian Womens Fascist Movement Serbian Action Serbian Radical Party Slovak Peoples Party Steel Shield Svoboda Union of Bulgarian National Legions Ustase Ustase in Australia Croatian Revolutionary Brotherhood Vlajka Yugoslav Radical Union ZBOR North America Fascism in Canada Aryan Guard Aryan Nations Canadian Association for Free Expression Canadian Union of Fascists Citizens for Foreign Aid Reform Heritage Front Parti national social chretien Fascism in the United States American Front American Nazi Party Creativity Fascist League of North America German American Bund Goyim Defense League Hammerskins Identity Evropa LaRouche movement League of the South National Alliance United States National Renaissance Party Nationalist Social Club-131 National Socialist Legion National Socialist Liberation Front National Socialist Movement National States Rights Party National Vanguard Nationalist Front United States The Order Patriot Front Proud Boys Rise Above Movement Silver Legion of America Christian Party United States 1930s Third Klan Traditionalist Worker Party Vanguard America Volksfront White Aryan Resistance Wotansvolk Revolutionary Mexicanist Action Mexican Democratic Party Mexican Fascist Party National Pro Patria Party National Synarchist Union Nationalist Front of Mexico Order of Nine Angles Oceania Action Zealandia Antipodean Resistance Australia First Movement Australia First Party Australian Defence League Australian National Socialist Party Centre Party Lads Society National Action Australia National Socialist Network National Socialist Party of Australia Progressive Nationalist Party Reclaim Australia True Blue Crew United Patriots Front South America Agrarian Labor Party Argentine Anticommunist Alliance Argentine Fascist Party Argentine Nationalist Action Argentine Patriotic League Bolivian Socialist Falange Brazilian Integralism Brazilian Integralist Action Brazilian Integralist Front Falangism in Latin America Female Peronist Party Iron Guard Argentina Nacionalismo National Fascist Party Argentina National Fascist Union Nationalist Liberation Alliance National Liberation Movement National Socialist Movement of Chile National Universitary Concentration New Triumph Party Patriot Front Argentina Popular Dignity Popular Freedom Alliance Popular Representation Party Popular Socialist Vanguard Republican League La Resistencia Dios Patria y Familia Revolutionary Union Tacuara Nationalist Movement People Australia Campbell Eric Campbell Graeme Cottrell Groot Mills Saleam Austria Dollfuss Miklas Pfrimer Planetta Schuschnigg Seyss-Inquart Starhemberg Belgium Daye Declercq Degrelle Denis Elias Eriksson Hermans Lagrou Poulet Severen Streel van de Wiele Croatia Boban Francetic Kraljevic Kvaternik Luburic Pavelic Pavicic Rover Servatzy Finland Helanen Isotalo Kalsta Konkka Kosola Orko Simojoki Somersalo Torni Varjonen France Augier Bardeche Benoist-Mechin Beraud Brasillach Bucard Chateaubriant Deat Deroulede Dior Doriot La Rochelle Lagardelle Laval Petain Rebatet Myatt Valois Vial Germany Abetz Andrae Baeumler Berchtold Berger Best Brunner Buhler Darre Falkenhausen Hocke Feder Forster Frank Franz V Gesche Goebbels Goring Graf Greiser Gunther Hanke Heiden Hess Heydrich Himmler Hitler Klintzsch Kuhn Kuhnen Ludendorff Maurice Muller Niekisch Ploetz Rahn Reitsch Remer Renthe-Fink Ribbentrop Rieger Rosenberg Schmitt Schreck Skorzeny Strasser Gregor Strasser Otto Streicher Terboven Thadden Krosigk Zundel Greece Dragoumis Kasidiaris Koryzis Lagos Michaloliakos Papadopoulos India Advani Bose Godse Golwalkar Hedgewar Modi Mukherjee Savarkar Vajpayee Iran Forouhar Kashani Monshizadeh Pezeshkpour Teymourtash Israel Ahimeir Ben-Ari Ben-Gvir Eldad Eliyahu Goldstein Gopstein Greenberg Haivri Heruti Kahane Marzel Natan-Zada Stern Yeivin Italy Acerbo Alfieri Ambris DAnnunzio Azara Badoglio Balbo Torrente Ballester Bastianini Bianchi Boni Bono Boselli Bottai Ciano Costanzo Ciano Galeazzo Cogni Corradini Evola Freda Gentile Giuriati Gozi Grandi Graziani Guidi Malaparte Marinetti Michels Morgagni Mussolini Olivetti Panunzio Papini Pavolini Rauti Ricci Ridruejo Rocco Rossoni Sarfatti Soffici Spirito Volpi Japan Akao Araki Cho Hashimoto Honjo Kita Kodama Matsuoka Nonaka Okawa Sasakawa Romania Antonescu Bacaloglu Codreanu Crainic Cuza Gigurtu Goga Manoilescu Mota Ogoranu Sima Russia Aijo Astrouski Barkashov Borovikov Dugin Dugina Ilyin Kaminski Kuryokhin Letov Limonov Martsinkevich Milchakov Oktan Prilepin Prokhanov Rodzaevsky Stojadinovic Zhirinovsky Spain Arrese Bau Nolla Bilbao Eguia Carrero Blanco Fernandez-Cuesta Franco Franco y Polo Gimenez Caballero Primo de Rivera Ramos Sanchez Mazas Serrano Suner Ukraine Bandera Biletsky Dontsov Gubarev Klyachkivsky Lebed Rebet Samchuk Shukhevych Stetsko Tyahnybok Vitrenko United Kingdom Beckett Chamberlain Chesterton Griffin Jordan Leese Mosley Diana Mosley Oswald Pankhurst Pearson Ramsay Southgate Tyndall Wellesley United States Abascal Anglin Auernheimer Biggs Black Carto Collins Dilling Duke Enoch Frankhouser Fuentes Garza Graves Heimbach Hall Invictus Jones Joyce Kessler Lane LaRouche Lindbergh MacDonald Mason Metzger Miller Mills Minadeo Mullins Nordean Patsalos Pelley Pierce Pound Rockwell Rubin Smith Spencer Strom Tarrio Unz Vonsyatsky Yockey Other Arana Osorio Arcand DAubuisson Bahceli Blythe Bushati Caetano Carrasco Castillo Armas Celmins Cerro Clausen Coughlin Devi ODuffy Durcansky Frasheri al-Gaylani Genoud Gombos Gustloff Hacha Hamidov Hlinka al-Husayni al-Husseini Lee Linderman Ljotic Lugones Lukov Mach Madero Martinez Merlika-Kruja Noreika Piasecki Peron Phibunsongkhram Preto Puyi Quisling Ramirez Rhee Riva-Aguero y Osma Rupnik Saadeh Salgado Sayigh Seselj Szalasi TerreBlanche Tiso Tsankov Vikernes Wang Weinstein Works Literature 1776 Returns La Conquista del Estado The Culture of Critique Defiance Did Six Million Really Die? The Doctrine of Fascism Fascist Manifesto For My Legionaries The Foundations of Geopolitics: The Geopolitical Future of Russia The Fourth Political Theory Hitlers Zweites Buch Hunter Impeachment of Man Imperium: The Philosophy of History and Politics An Investigation of Global Policy with the Yamato Race as Nucleus Kokutairon and Pure Socialism The Last Will of a Russian Fascist Manifesto of Race Manifesto of the Fascist Intellectuals Mein Kampf My Autobiography My Life The Myth of the Twentieth Century OPROP! Our Race Will Rule Undisputed Over The World Protestantische Rompilger A Racial Program for the Twentieth Century Siege The Turner Diaries A Warning to the Hindus Who Are the Mind Benders? Periodicals Action Ajan Suunta LAlba El Alcazar The American Review Der Angriff Arriba The Blackshirt La Conquista del Estado The Daily Stormer Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung Das Deutsche Madel La Difesa della Razza Eleftheros Kosmos The European Fashist Fashizmi La France au travail Fritt Folk Fronten Gandirea Gioventu Fascista Golden Dawn Hamaas Hrvatski Domobran Je suis partout Kangura Kansallissosialisti Limonka Masada2000 Munchener Beobachter Nash Put Nastup Nation Europa Neue Anthropologie Neues Volk Het Nieuwe Volk Norsk-Tysk Tidsskrift Novopress Norsk-Tysk Tidsskrift Organiser Panchjanya Panzerbar Parole der Woche Le Pays Reel Der Pimpf Il Popolo dItalia Das Reich Revue dhistoire du fascisme Das Schwarze Korps Sfarma-Piatra Signal Siniristi Spearhead Der Sturmer Turkische Post Der Umbruch Vairas Vlajka Volk en Staat Volkischer Beobachter Die Wehrmacht Wochenspruch der NSDAP Film LArmata Azzurra Bengasi Condottieri The Daughter of the Samurai Erbkrank Europa: The Last Battle The Great Appeal The Old Guard Raza Scipio Africanus: The Defeat of Hannibal Der Sieg des Glaubens The Siege of the Alcazar Lo squadrone bianco Tag der Freiheit: Unsere Wehrmacht Triumph of the Will Other Allach Ethnic Cleansing Related topics Art of the Third Reich Fascist architecture Heroic realism Hindutva pop Nazi architecture Nazism and cinema Organizations Institutional Ahnenerbe Chamber of Fasces and Corporations Grand Council of Fascism Imperial Way Faction Italian Nationalist Association National Socialist League of the Reich for Physical Exercise Quadrumvirs Activist Adelaide Institute Agrarian Trade Union Federation The Britons Casuals United DeVlag European Social Movement Finnish Realm Union Francisco Franco National Foundation Friends of New Germany German American Bund GRECE The Link Mladorossi National Party of Europe National Policy Institute National Popular Consciousness Peoples Party Our Slovakia Popular Force Party Republic Slovakia Resistance Records Right Club Russian Fascist Organization Youth Adler und Falke Albanian Lictor Youth Arab Lictor Youth Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha Blue-and-Blacks Ethiopian Lictor Youth Fascist Union of Youth Frente de Juventudes Al-Futuwwa Gioventu Italiana del Littorio Great Japan Youth Party Hitler Youth Faith and Beauty Society Deutsches Jungvolk Jungmadelbund League of German Girls Jeunesse Populaire Francaise Juventudes de Accion Popular Korean National Youth Association Levente Mocidade Portuguesa Nationale Jeugdstorm National League of Sweden National Socialist Liberation Front National Youth Sweden National Youth Italy National Youth Alliance National Youth Organisation Greece Opera Nazionale Balilla Osterreichisches Jungvolk PatrioticEureka Youth League Union of Fascist Little Ones Union of Young Fascists Vanguard boys Union of Young Fascists Vanguard girls Ustase Youth Wiking-Jugend Youth Front Paramilitary and terrorist Abhinav Bharat Albanian Fascist Militia Atomwaffen Division Azov Brigade Bajrang Dal The Base Battle Organization of Russian Nationalists Black Brigades Black Legion Blackshirts Blueshirts Canada Blueshirts Ireland Column 88 Combat Terrorist Organization Confederation of the Nation Corpul Muncitoresc Legionar Croatian Defence Forces Croatian National Resistance Croatian Revolutionary Brotherhood Bugojno group Einsatzgruppen Fasci di Azione Rivoluzionaria Falange Armata Falange Militia FEAR Flemish Guard Flemish Legion Frontbann Gold Shirts Hilfspolizei Hitler Youth Greenshirts Romania Greyshirts Heimwehr Hirden Hlinka Guard Hungarian National Defence Association Interbrigades Iron Wolf Jewish Defense League Jewish Defense Organization Kataeb Regulatory Forces Lancieri Legion Wasa Lehava Lehi Levente Makapili Mano Blanca National Republican Guard National Socialism White Power New Guard The Order Ostmarkische Sturmscharen Rodobrana Russian Imperial Movement Russian National Unity 2000 S14 Schutzstaffel Serbian Volunteer Corps Sicarii Sich Battalion Silver Shirts Sturmabteilung Sudetendeutsches Freikorps Terror Against Terror Third Klan Ukrainian Insurgent Army Ukrainian Peoples Militsiya Ustase Militia Volkssport Walloon Guard Walloon Legion Waffen-SS Wagner Group Rusich Group Weerbaarheidsafdeling Werwolf Westland New Post Yokusan Sonendan Youth Front Student Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad Avanguardia Giovanile Fascista Frente de Estudiantes Sindicalistas German Student Union National Socialist German Students League Sindicato Espanol Universitario Student Action International Axis powers NSDAPAO ODESSA History 1900s Herero and Nama genocide and the Holocaust 1910s Arditi Fascio Fasci dAzione Rivoluzionaria Armenian genocide and the Holocaust 1920s March on Rome Corfu incident Acerbo Law Beer Hall Putsch Aventine Secession Italian economic battles Le Faisceau 28 May 1926 coup detat Libyan genocide 1930s March of the Iron Will November 1932 German federal election March 1933 German federal election Enabling Act Austrian Civil War July Putsch 1934 Montreux Fascist conference Romani Holocaust 4th of August Regime Anti-Comintern Pact Spanish Civil War 1940s World War II Nazi crimes against the Polish nation The Holocaust Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia End in Italy Nuremberg Trials Tokyo Trials Lists Anti-fascists Books about Hitler British fascist parties Fascist movements by country A-F G-M N-T U-Z Nazi ideologues Nazi leaders Secretaries of Italian fascist parties Speeches by Hitler SS personnel Related topics Authoritarian conservatism Chiangism Francoism Khomeinism Maurrassisme Pinochetism Putinism Ziaism Alt-right Alt-lite Alt-right pipeline Alt-tech Identitarian movement Anti-fascism Berlusconism Conservative Revolution Europe a Nation Fascist epithet Fascist mysticism Feudal fascism F-scale personality test Garveyism Germanisation of Poles during the Partitions Italianization of South Tyrol Japanization Morenazi Neosocialism Parasemi-fascism Post-fascism Proto-fascism Red fascism Redgreenbrown alliance Roman salute Sansepolcrismo Scientific racism Aryanism Nordicism Social fascism Sorelianism Synarchism Szeged Idea Trumpism Volkisch movement Women in Nazi Germany Category v t e Nazism Organisation Ahnenerbe Geheime Staatspolizei Deutsches Jungvolk Hitler Youth League of German Girls NSDAB NSDStB NSRL NSFK NSKK NSF Nationalsozialistische Monatshefte Nazi Party Sturmabteilung SA Schutzstaffel SS History Early timeline National Socialist Program Hitlers rise to power Machtergreifung Gleichschaltung German rearmament Nazi Germany Religion in Nazi Germany Kirchenkampf Adolf Hitlers cult of personality Enabling Act of 1933 Night of the Long Knives Nuremberg rallies Nuremberg Laws Anti-Comintern Pact Kristallnacht Anschluss World War II The Holocaust 19381939 German expedition to Tibet Tripartite Pact Denazification Nuremberg trials Neo-Nazism Final solution Concentration camps Deportations Doctors Trial Extermination camps Genocide Ghettos Human experimentation Labour camps Pogroms Racial segregation Ideology Aestheticization of politics Anti-communism Anti-intellectualism Anti-liberalism Anti-pacifism Blood and soil Chauvinism Class collaboration Conspiracism Dolchstolegende Jewish conspiracy theory Corporatism Cult of personality Dictatorship Fuhrerprinzip Direct action Economic interventionism Eugenics Geopolitik Heimat Imperialism Greater Germanic Reich Heim ins Reich Lebensraum Pan-Germanism Militarism Nationalism Ethno Racial Palingenetic Ultra New Man New Order One-party state Populism Propaganda Prussianism Racism Antisemitism Anti-Slavic sentiment Aryan race Aryanism Master race Nordicism Rassenschande Untermenschen Volkisch equality Volkisch movement Reactionary modernism Social Darwinism Social interventionism Social order State capitalism Syncretism Totalitarianism Volksgemeinschaft Volk ohne Raum Volkskorper Politicians Bormann Daluege Donitz Drexler Eichmann Frank Frick Hess Heydrich Himmler Hitler Goebbels Goring Lammers von Ribbentrop Rohm Schacht von Schirach Seyss-Inquart Speer Strasser Gregor Strasser Otto Streicher Ideologues Anacker Bergmann Baeumler Burnouf Chamberlain Darre Drumont Eckart Feder Ford de Gobineau Grimm Hauer Haushofer al-Husseini Jung Krannhals Kriek von Liebenfels von List Lons Muller Plenge Ratzel Rosenberg Saadeh Schafer Schmalenbach Schmitt von Sebottendorf Schwarz Stapel Atrocities and war crimes Action T4 Nazi concentration camps Extermination camp Final Solution Human experimentation Romani genocide Outside Germany Americas Brazil Chile Europe Greece Sweden Parties American Nazi Party Arrow Cross Party Hungary German American Bund German National Movement in Liechtenstein Nasjonal Samling Norway National Socialist Movement in the Netherlands National Socialist Movement of Chile National Socialist Movement United States National Socialist Workers Party of Denmark Nordic Resistance Movement Ossewabrandwag South Africa SUMKA Iran Syrian Social Nationalist Party Tsagaan Khas Mongolia World Union of National Socialists Lists Bibliography of Adolf Hitler Nazi ideologues Nazi Party leaders and officials Nazi Party members Last surviving war crime suspects Speeches given by Adolf Hitler SS personnel Role and impact in German society The Wehrmacht Economy Nobility Related topics Art Architecture Cinema Atszism Beefsteak Nazi Economy Glossary Drang nach Osten Generalplan Ost German Romanticism Political views of Adolf Hitler Racial theories Sorelianism Strasserism Women Category v t e Nazi Party Leader Anton Drexler 19191921 Adolf Hitler 19211945 Martin Bormann 1945 History Adolf Hitlers rise to power Beer Hall Putsch Brown House Munich Denazification Enabling Act of 1933 German Workers Party National Socialist Program Nazism Night of the Long Knives Nuremberg rallies Rohm scandal SA Thule Society Party offices Amt Rosenberg Hitler Youth Hitlers Chancellery Nazi Party Chancellery Office of Colonial Policy Office of Military Policy Office of Racial Policy Office of Foreign Affairs NSDAPAO SS SS Education Office Publications Volkischer Beobachter Das Schwarze Korps Das Reich Innviertler Heimatblatt Arbeitertum Der Angriff Panzerbar Der Sturmer Kampfverlag Notable members Artur Axmann Houston Stewart Chamberlain Kurt Daluege Richard Walther Darre Rudolf Diels Karl Donitz Dietrich Eckart Adolf Eichmann Hans Frank Roland Freisler Wilhelm Frick Walther Funk Joseph Goebbels Hermann Goring Ernst Hanfstaengl Rudolf Hess Reinhard Heydrich Heinrich Himmler Rudolf Hoss Ernst Kaltenbrunner Robert Ley Josef Mengele Konstantin von Neurath Joachim von Ribbentrop Ernst Rohm Alfred Rosenberg Bernhard Rust Fritz Todt Baldur von Schirach Arthur Seyss-Inquart Albert Speer Gregor Strasser Otto Strasser Julius Streicher Derivatives Black Front Strasserism German Social Union Deutsche Reichspartei National Democratic Party of Germany Socialist Reich Party Related articles Adolf Hitler Schools Munich Documentation Centre National Political Institutes of Education Nazi concentration camps Nazi Germany Nazi songs Horst-Wessel-Lied Ranks and insignia of the Nazi Party Samoan branch of the Nazi Party v t e Time Persons of the Year 19271950 Charles Lindbergh 1927 Walter Chrysler 1928 Owen D. Young 1929 Mohandas Gandhi 1930 Pierre Laval 1931 Franklin D. Roosevelt 1932 Hugh S. Johnson 1933 Franklin D. Roosevelt 1934 Haile Selassie 1935 Wallis Simpson 1936 Chiang Kai-shek Soong Mei-ling 1937 Adolf Hitler 1938 Joseph Stalin 1939 Winston Churchill 1940 Franklin D. Roosevelt 1941 Joseph Stalin 1942 George Marshall 1943 Dwight D. Eisenhower 1944 Harry S. Truman 1945 James F. Byrnes 1946 George Marshall 1947 Harry S. Truman 1948 Winston Churchill 1949 The American Fighting-Man 1950 19511975 Mohammed Mosaddeq 1951 Elizabeth II 1952 Konrad Adenauer 1953 John Foster Dulles 1954 Harlow Curtice 1955 Hungarian Freedom Fighters 1956 Nikita Khrushchev 1957 Charles de Gaulle 1958 Dwight D. Eisenhower 1959 U.S. Scientists: George Beadle Charles Draper John Enders Donald A. Glaser Joshua Lederberg Willard Libby Linus Pauling Edward Purcell Isidor Rabi Emilio Segre William Shockley Edward Teller Charles Townes James Van Allen Robert Woodward 1960 John F. Kennedy 1961 Pope John XXIII 1962 Martin Luther King Jr. 1963 Lyndon B. Johnson 1964 William Westmoreland 1965 The Generation Twenty-Five and Under 1966 Lyndon B. Johnson 1967 The Apollo 8 Astronauts : William Anders Frank Borman Jim Lovell 1968 The Middle Americans 1969 Willy Brandt 1970 Richard Nixon 1971 Henry Kissinger Richard Nixon 1972 John Sirica 1973 King Faisal 1974 American Women: Susan Brownmiller Kathleen Byerly Alison Cheek Jill Conway Betty Ford Ella Grasso Carla Hills Barbara Jordan Billie Jean King Susie Sharp Carol Sutton Addie Wyatt 1975 19762000 Jimmy Carter 1976 Anwar Sadat 1977 Deng Xiaoping 1978 Ayatollah Khomeini 1979 Ronald Reagan 1980 Lech Waesa 1981 The Computer 1982 Ronald Reagan Yuri Andropov 1983 Peter Ueberroth 1984 Deng Xiaoping 1985 Corazon Aquino 1986 Mikhail Gorbachev 1987 The Endangered Earth 1988 Mikhail Gorbachev 1989 George H. W. Bush 1990 Ted Turner 1991 Bill Clinton 1992 The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat F. W. de Klerk Nelson Mandela Yitzhak Rabin 1993 Pope John Paul II 1994 Newt Gingrich 1995 David Ho 1996 Andrew Grove 1997 Bill Clinton Ken Starr 1998 Jeff Bezos 1999 George W. Bush 2000 2001present Rudolph Giuliani 2001 The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper Coleen Rowley Sherron Watkins 2002 The American Soldier 2003 George W. Bush 2004 The Good Samaritans: Bono Bill Gates Melinda Gates 2005 You 2006 Vladimir Putin 2007 Barack Obama 2008 Ben Bernanke 2009 Mark Zuckerberg 2010 The Protester 2011 Barack Obama 2012 Pope Francis 2013 Ebola Fighters : Dr. Jerry Brown Dr. Kent Brantly Ella Watson-Stryker Foday Gollah Salome Karwah 2014 Angela Merkel 2015 Donald Trump 2016 The Silence Breakers 2017 The Guardians: Jamal Khashoggi Maria Ressa Wa Lone Kyaw Soe Oo Staff of The Capital 2018 Greta Thunberg 2019 Joe Biden Kamala Harris 2020 Elon Musk 2021 Volodymyr Zelenskyy Spirit of Ukraine 2022 Taylor Swift 2023 v t e Chancellors of Germany since 1867 North German Confederation Bundeskanzler 18671871 Otto von Bismarck German Empire Reichskanzler 18711918 Otto von Bismarck Leo von Caprivi Prince Chlodwig zu Hohenlohe-Schillingsfurst Bernhard von Bulow Theobald von Bethmann Hollweg Georg Michaelis Georg von Hertling Prince Maximilian of Baden Weimar Republic Reichskanzler 19191933 Friedrich Ebert Philipp Scheidemann as Ministerprasident Gustav Bauer as Ministerprasident later Chancellor Hermann Muller Constantin Fehrenbach Joseph Wirth Wilhelm Cuno Gustav Stresemann Wilhelm Marx Hans Luther Wilhelm Marx Hermann Muller Heinrich Bruning Franz von Papen Kurt von Schleicher Adolf Hitler Nazi Germany Reichskanzler 19331945 Adolf Hitler Joseph Goebbels Count Schwerin von Krosigk as Leading Minister Federal Republic Bundeskanzler 1949present Konrad Adenauer CDU 19491963 Ludwig Erhard CDU 19631966 Kurt Georg Kiesinger CDU 19661969 Willy Brandt SPD 19691974 Helmut Schmidt SPD 19741982 Helmut Kohl CDU 19821998 Gerhard Schroder SPD 19982005 Angela Merkel CDU 20052021 Olaf Scholz SPD 2021present List of chancellors v t e Members of the Hitler Cabinet Chancellor : Adolf Hitler Vice-Chancellor : Franz von Papen Deputy Fuhrer: Rudolf Hess President of the Reichstag : Hermann Goring Armaments Fritz Todt Albert Speer Aviation Hermann Goring Church Affairs Hanns Kerrl Hermann Muhs acting Eastern Territories Alfred Rosenberg Economics Alfred Hugenberg Kurt Schmitt Hjalmar Schacht Hermann Goring Walther Funk Education Bernhard Rust Finance Lutz Graf Schwerin von Krosigk Food and Agriculture Alfred Hugenberg Richard Walther Darre Herbert Backe Foreign Affairs Konstantin von Neurath Joachim von Ribbentrop Interior Wilhelm Frick Heinrich Himmler Justice Franz Gurtner Franz Schlegelberger acting Otto Georg Thierack Labour Franz Seldte Postal Affairs Paul Freiherr von Eltz-Rubenach Wilhelm Ohnesorge Propaganda Joseph Goebbels Reichswehr Werner von Blomberg Transport Paul Freiherr von Eltz-Rubenach Julius Dorpmuller Reichsministers without portfolio Hans Frank Wilhelm Frick Hermann Goring Rudolf Hess Konstantin Hierl Hanns Kerrl Hans Lammers Konstantin von Neurath Ernst Rohm Hjalmar Schacht Arthur Seyss-Inquart Members granted rank authority equivalent to a Reichsminister Martin Bormann Walther von Brauchitsch Karl Donitz Karl Hermann Frank Werner von Fritsch Wilhelm Keitel Otto Meissner Erich Raeder Reichsfuhrer SS : Heinrich Himmler Stabschef SA : Ernst Rohm v t e Heads of State of Germany since 1871 German Reich 18711945 Emperors : Wilhelm I Frederick III Wilhelm II Presidents : Friedrich Ebert Paul von Hindenburg Adolf Hitler Fuhrer and Reichskanzler Karl Donitz Federal Republic of Germany since 1949 Theodor Heuss Heinrich Lubke Gustav Heinemann Walter Scheel Karl Carstens Richard von Weizsacker Roman Herzog Johannes Rau Horst Kohler Christian Wulff Joachim Gauck Frank-Walter Steinmeier East Germany 19491990 Wilhelm Pieck Walter Ulbricht Willi Stoph Erich Honecker Egon Krenz Manfred Gerlach Sabine Bergmann-Pohl Italics indicates acting holder v t e People killed or wounded in the 20 July plot Wounded Heinz Assmann Karl Bodenschatz Heinrich Borgmann Heinz Buchholz Walther Buhle Herbert Buchs Hermann Fegelein Otto Gunsche Adolf Heusinger Adolf Hitler Alfred Jodl Wilhelm Keitel Walter Scherff Nicolaus von Below Ernst John von Freyend Karl-Jesko von Puttkamer Franz von Sonnleithner Hans-Erich Voss Heinz Waizenegger Walter Warlimont Killed Heinz Berger Heinz Brandt Gunther Korten Rudolf Schmundt v t e Final occupants of the Fuhrerbunker by date of departure 1945 20 April Hermann Goring Heinrich Himmler 21 April Robert Ley Karl-Jesko von Puttkamer 22 April Hugo Blaschke Karl Gebhardt Christa Schroeder Johanna Wolf Eckhard Christian 23 April Albert Bormann Theodor Morell Joachim von Ribbentrop Albert Speer Julius Schaub 24 April Walter Frentz 28 April Robert Ritter von Greim Hanna Reitsch 29 April Bernd Freytag von Loringhoven Gerhard Boldt Rudolf Weiss Wilhelm Zander Heinz Lorenz Willy Johannmeyer Walter Wagner 30 April Nicolaus von Below 1 May Wilhelm Mohnke Traudl Junge Gerda Christian Constanze Manziarly Else Kruger Otto Gunsche Walther Hewel Ernst-Gunther Schenck Hans-Erich Voss Johann Rattenhuber Peter Hogl Werner Naumann Martin Bormann Hans Baur Ludwig Stumpfegger Artur Axmann Georg Betz Heinz Linge Erich Kempka Heinrich Doose Gunther Schwagermann Ewald Lindloff Hans Reisser Armin D. Lehmann Josef Ochs Heinz Kruger Werner Schwiedel Gerhard Schach Hans Fritzsche Kathe Heusermann 2 May Helmuth Weidling Hans Refior Theodor von Dufving Siegfried Knappe Rochus Misch Still present on 2 May Werner Haase Erna Flegel Helmut Kunz Fritz Tornow Liselotte Chervinska Johanna Ruf Johannes Hentschel Committed suicide Ernst-Robert Grawitz 24 April Adolf Hitler 30 April Eva Hitler nee Braun 30 April Joseph Goebbels 1 May Magda Goebbels 1 May Alwin-Broder Albrecht 1 May Wilhelm Burgdorf 2 May Hans Krebs 2 May Franz Schadle 2 May Killed Hermann Fegelein executed for desertion 28 April Blondi Hitlers dog poisoned 29 April Goebbels children poisoned 1 May Unknown Heinrich Muller v t e Time 100: The Most Important People of the 20th Century Leaders revolutionaries David Ben-Gurion Winston Churchill Mahatma Gandhi Mikhail Gorbachev Adolf Hitler Ho Chi Minh Pope John Paul II Ruhollah Khomeini Martin Luther King Jr. Vladimir Lenin Nelson Mandela Mao Zedong Ronald Reagan Eleanor Roosevelt Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Margaret Sanger Margaret Thatcher Unknown Tiananmen Square rebel Lech Waesa Artists entertainers Louis Armstrong Lucille Ball The Beatles Marlon Brando Coco Chanel Charlie Chaplin Le Corbusier Bob Dylan T. S. Eliot Aretha Franklin Martha Graham Jim Henson James Joyce Pablo Picasso Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein Bart Simpson Frank Sinatra Steven Spielberg Igor Stravinsky Oprah Winfrey Builders titans Stephen Bechtel Sr. Leo Burnett Willis Carrier Walt Disney Henry Ford Bill Gates Amadeo Giannini Ray Kroc Estee Lauder William Levitt Lucky Luciano Louis B. Mayer Charles E. Merrill Akio Morita Walter Reuther Pete Rozelle David Sarnoff Juan Trippe Sam Walton Thomas J. Watson Jr. Scientists thinkers Leo Baekeland Tim Berners-Lee Rachel Carson Albert Einstein Philo Farnsworth Enrico Fermi Alexander Fleming Sigmund Freud Robert H. Goddard Kurt Godel Edwin Hubble John Maynard Keynes Leakey family Jean Piaget Jonas Salk William Shockley Alan Turing Francis Crick James Watson Ludwig Wittgenstein Wright brothers Heroes icons Muhammad Ali The American G.I. Lady Diana Spencer Anne Frank Billy Graham Che Guevara Edmund Hillary Tenzing Norgay Helen Keller Kennedy family Bruce Lee Charles Lindbergh Harvey Milk Marilyn Monroe Emmeline Pankhurst Rosa Parks Pele Jackie Robinson Andrei Sakharov Mother Teresa Bill W. Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST 2 WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Russia 2 Spain Romania Portugal Netherlands Norway Taiwan 2 Latvia Croatia Chile 2 Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii ORCID Artists ULAN RKD Artists KulturNav People BMLO Trove Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA SNAC Te Papa New Zealand Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine RISM Portals : Politics Germany Genocide Adolf Hitler at Wikipedias sister projects : Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Retrieved from https:en.wikipedia.orgwindex.php?titleAdolfHitleroldid1250651985 Categories : Adolf Hitler 1889 births 1945 deaths 1945 suicides 20th-century chancellors of Germany 20th-century German male writers 20th-century German non-fiction writers 20th-century presidents of Germany Anti-American sentiment in Germany Anti-black racism in Germany Austrian emigrants to Germany Austrian male painters Austrian people of World War I Authoritarianism Former Roman Catholics German Army personnel of World War I German Workers Party members German casualties of World War I German conspiracy theorists German critics of Christianity German eugenicists German military leaders of World War II German military personnel who died by suicide German people of Austrian descent German political writers German politicians who died by suicide German revolutionaries Heads of state who died by suicide Hitler family Holocaust perpetrators Jewish German history Joint suicides by Nazis Members of the Reichstag 1933 Military personnel of Bavaria Naturalized citizens of Germany Nazi Party officials Nazi Party politicians Nazi eugenics Nazis convicted of crimes Nazis who participated in the Beer Hall Putsch Artists who died by suicide People convicted of treason against Germany People from Braunau am Inn People with Parkinsons disease People wounded in the 20 July plot Perpetrators of the Night of the Long Knives Recipients of German pardons Recipients of the Iron Cross 1914 1st class Recipients of the Iron Cross 1914 2nd class Recipients of the Military Merit Cross Bavaria Romani genocide perpetrators Suicides by firearm in Germany The Holocaust in Germany Time Person of the Year Totalitarianism World War II political leaders Nazis who died by suicide in Nazi Germany Politicians killed in World War II Members of the Reichstag 19331936 Members of the Reichstag 19361938 Members of the Reichstag 19381945 Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Pages with German IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing German-language text Pages using Lang-xx templates Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Good articles Wikipedia extended-confirmed-protected pages EngvarB from September 2018 Use shortened footnotes from February 2021 Use dmy dates from December 2023 Articles with hAudio microformats Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing Chinese-language text CS1 German-language sources de CS1: long volume value Spoken articles Articles with Internet Archive links Open Library ID same as Wikidata Articles with Open Library links Articles containing French-language text Articles with excerpts Articles with suppressed authority control identifiers Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 11 October 2024 at 17:56 UTC . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view