Albert Einstein - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Donate Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 1 Life and career Toggle Life and career subsection 1.1 Childhood youth and education 1.2 Marriages relationships and children 1.3 19021909: Assistant at the Swiss Patent Office 1.4 19001905: First scientific papers 1.5 19081933: Early academic career 1.6 1919: Putting general relativity to the test 1.7 19211923: Coming to terms with fame 1.8 19221932: Serving the League of Nations 1.9 1925: Touring South America 1.10 19301931: Touring the US 1.11 1933: Emigration to the US 1.11.1 Refugee status 1.11.2 Resident scholar at the Institute for Advanced Study 1.11.3 World War II and the Manhattan Project 1.11.4 US citizenship 1.12 Personal views 1.12.1 Political views 1.12.2 Relationship with Zionism 1.12.3 Religious and philosophical views 1.12.4 Love of music 1.13 Death 2 Scientific career Toggle Scientific career subsection 2.1 Statistical mechanics 2.1.1 Thermodynamic fluctuations and statistical physics 2.1.2 Theory of critical opalescence 2.2 1905 Annus Mirabilis papers 2.3 Special relativity 2.4 General relativity 2.4.1 General relativity and the equivalence principle 2.4.2 Gravitational waves 2.4.3 Hole argument and Entwurf theory 2.4.4 Physical cosmology 2.4.5 Energy momentum pseudotensor 2.4.6 Wormholes 2.4.7 EinsteinCartan theory 2.4.8 Equations of motion 2.5 Old quantum theory 2.5.1 Photons and energy quanta 2.5.2 Quantized atomic vibrations 2.5.3 BoseEinstein statistics 2.5.4 Waveparticle duality 2.5.5 Zero-point energy 2.5.6 Stimulated emission 2.5.7 Matter waves 2.6 Quantum mechanics 2.6.1 Einsteins objections to quantum mechanics 2.6.2 Bohr versus Einstein 2.6.3 EinsteinPodolskyRosen paradox 2.7 Unified field theory 2.8 Other investigations 2.9 Collaboration with other scientists 2.9.1 Einsteinde Haas experiment 2.9.2 Einstein as an inventor 3 Non-scientific legacy 4 In popular culture 5 Awards and honors 6 Publications Toggle Publications subsection 6.1 Scientific 6.2 Others 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Works cited 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Albert Einstein 226 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch Anaraskiela nglisc Aragones Armaneashti Arpetan Asturianu Avanee Aymar aru Azrbaycanca Basa Bali Bamanankan Ban-lam-gu Basa Banyumasan Bikol Central Bosanski Brezhoneg Catala Cebuano Cestina Chavacano de Zamboanga ChiTumbuka Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Davvisamegiella Deutsch Dine bizaad Eesti Espanol Esperanto Estremenu Euskara Fiji Hindi Froyskt Francais Frysk Fulfulde Gaeilge Gaelg Gaidhlig Galego Goychi Konknni Hak-ka-ngi Hausa Hawaii Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Bahasa Hulontalo Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Islenska Italiano Jawa Kaby Kapampangan Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyol ayisyen Kriyol gwiyannen Kurdi Ladino Latina Latviesu Letzebuergesch Lietuviu Ligure Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala La .lojban. Luganda Lombard Magyar Madhura Malagasy Malti Bahasa Melayu Ming-deng-ngu Mirandes Nahuatl Nederlands Nedersaksies Nordfriisk Norsk bokmal Norsk nynorsk Novial Occitan Oromoo Ozbekcha Papiamentu Patois Picard Piemonteis Tok Pisin Plattduutsch Polski Portugues Qaraqalpaqsha Qrmtatarca Ripoarisch Romana Rumantsch Runa Simi Sakizaya Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovencina Slovenscina Slunski Soomaaliga srpski Srpskohrvatski Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog Taclhit Taqbaylit tatarca Turkce Turkmence Uyghurche Vahcuengh Veneto Vepsan kel Tieng Viet Volapuk Voro Walon Winaray Wolof Yoruba Zazaki Zeeuws Zemaiteska Betawi Batak Mandailing Dusun Bundu-liwan Tolsi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Multilingual Wikisource Wikiquote Wikisource Wikiversity Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia German-born physicist 18791955 Einstein redirects here. For other uses see Einstein disambiguation and Albert Einstein disambiguation . Albert Einstein Einstein in 1921 Born 1879-03-14 14 March 1879 Ulm Kingdom of Wurttemberg German Empire Died 18 April 1955 1955-04-18 aged 76 Princeton New Jersey US Citizenship Kingdom of Wurttemberg part of the German Empire until 1896 note 1 Stateless 18961901 Switzerland 19011955 Austria part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire 19111912 Kingdom of Prussia part of the German Empire 19141918 note 1 Free State of Prussia Weimar Republic 19181933 note 1 United States 19401955 Education Swiss federal polytechnic school in Zurich Dipl. 1900 University of Zurich PhD 1905 Known for See list General relativity Special relativity Photoelectric effect E mc 2 massenergy equivalence E hf PlanckEinstein relation Theory of Brownian motion Einstein field equations BoseEinstein statistics BoseEinstein condensate Gravitational wave Cosmological constant Unified field theory EPR paradox Ensemble interpretation List of other concepts Spouses Mileva Maric m. 1903; div. 1919 Elsa Lowenthal m. 1919; died 1936 Children Lieserl Hans Albert Eduard Tete Awards Barnard Medal for Meritorious Service to Science 1920 Nobel Prize in Physics 1921 Matteucci Medal 1921 ForMemRS 1921 1 Copley Medal 1925 1 Gold Medal of RAS 1926 2 Max Planck Medal 1929 Membership of NAS 1942 3 Time Person of the Century 1999 Scientific career Fields Physics Institutions See list University of Bern 19081909 University of Zurich 19091911 Charles University in Prague 19111912 ETH Zurich 19121914 Prussian Academy of Sciences 19141933 Humboldt University of Berlin 19141933 Kaiser Wilhelm Institute director 19171933 German Physical Society president 19161918 Leiden University visits 1920 Institute for Advanced Study 19331955 California Institute of Technology visits 19311933 University of Oxford visits 19311933 4 Brandeis University director 19461947 Thesis Eine neue Bestimmung der Molekuldimensionen A New Determination of Molecular Dimensions 1905 Doctoral advisor Alfred Kleiner Other academic advisors Heinrich Friedrich Weber Albert Einsteins voice Opening of Einsteins speech 11 April 1943 for the United Jewish Appeal recording by Radio Universidad Nacional de La Plata Argentina Signature Albert Einstein a n s t a n EYEN -styne ; 5 German: albt antan i ; 14 March 1879 18 April 1955 was a German-born theoretical physicist who is widely held as one of the most influential scientists . Best known for developing the theory of relativity Einstein also made important contributions to quantum mechanics . 1 6 His massenergy equivalence formula E mc 2 which arises from special relativity has been called the worlds most famous equation . 7 He received the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics for his services to theoretical physics and especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect 8 a pivotal step in the development of quantum theory. Born in the German Empire Einstein moved to Switzerland in 1895 forsaking his German citizenship as a subject of the Kingdom of Wurttemberg note 1 the following year. In 1897 at the age of seventeen he enrolled in the mathematics and physics teaching diploma program at the Swiss federal polytechnic school in Zurich graduating in 1900. In 1901 he acquired Swiss citizenship which he kept for the rest of his life. In 1903 he secured a permanent position at the Swiss Patent Office in Bern. In 1905 he submitted a successful PhD dissertation to the University of Zurich . In 1914 he moved to Berlin in order to join the Prussian Academy of Sciences and the Humboldt University of Berlin . In 1917 he became director of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics ; he also became a German citizen again this time as a subject of the Kingdom of Prussia . note 1 In 1933 while Einstein was visiting the United States Adolf Hitler came to power in Germany. Horrified by the Nazi war of extermination against his fellow Jews 9 Einstein decided to remain in the US and was granted American citizenship in 1940. 10 On the eve of World War II he endorsed a letter to President Franklin D. Roosevelt alerting him to the potential German nuclear weapons program and recommended that the US begin similar research . Einstein supported the Allies but generally viewed the idea of nuclear weapons with great dismay. 11 Einsteins work is also known for its influence on the philosophy of science . 12 13 In 1905 he published four groundbreaking papers sometimes described as his annus mirabilis miracle year. 14 These papers outlined a theory of the photoelectric effect explained Brownian motion introduced his special theory of relativitya theory which addressed the inability of classical mechanics to account satisfactorily for the behavior of the electromagnetic field and demonstrated that if the special theory is correct mass and energy are equivalent to each other. In 1915 he proposed a general theory of relativity that extended his system of mechanics to incorporate gravitation . A cosmological paper that he published the following year laid out the implications of general relativity for the modeling of the structure and evolution of the universe as a whole. 15 16 In the middle part of his career Einstein made important contributions to statistical mechanics and quantum theory. Especially notable was his work on the quantum physics of radiation in which light consists of particles subsequently called photons . With the Indian physicist Satyendra Nath Bose he laid the groundwork for Bose-Einstein statistics . For much of the last phase of his academic life Einstein worked on two endeavors that proved ultimately unsuccessful. First he advocated against quantum theorys introduction of fundamental randomness into sciences picture of the world objecting that God does not play dice . 17 Second he attempted to devise a unified field theory by generalizing his geometric theory of gravitation to include electromagnetism too. As a result he became increasingly isolated from the mainstream modern physics . His intellectual achievements and originality made Einstein broadly synonymous with genius . 18 In 1999 he was named Time s Person of the Century . 19 In a 1999 poll of 130 leading physicists worldwide by the British journal Physics World Einstein was ranked the greatest physicist of all time. 20 Life and career Childhood youth and education See also: Einstein family Einstein in 1882 age 3 Albert Einstein was born in Ulm 21 in the Kingdom of Wurttemberg in the German Empire on 14 March 1879. 22 23 His parents secular Ashkenazi Jews were Hermann Einstein a salesman and engineer and Pauline Koch . In 1880 the family moved to Munich s borough of Ludwigsvorstadt-Isarvorstadt where Einsteins father and his uncle Jakob founded Elektrotechnische Fabrik J. Einstein Cie a company that manufactured electrical equipment based on direct current . 21 He often related a formative event from his youth when he was sick in bed and his father brought him a compass . This sparked his lifelong fascination with electromagnetism . He realized that Something deeply hidden had to be behind things. 24 Albert attended St. Peters Catholic elementary school in Munich from the age of five. When he was eight he was transferred to the Luitpold Gymnasium where he received advanced primary and then secondary school education. 25 In 1894 Hermann and Jakobs company tendered for a contract to install electric lighting in Munich but without successthey lacked the capital that would have been required to update their technology from direct current to the more efficient alternating current alternative. 26 The failure of their bid forced them to sell their Munich factory and search for new opportunities elsewhere. The Einstein family moved to Italy first to Milan and a few months later to Pavia where they settled in Palazzo Cornazzani . 27 Einstein then fifteen stayed behind in Munich in order to finish his schooling. His father wanted him to study electrical engineering but he was a fractious pupil who found the Gymnasiums regimen and teaching methods far from congenial. He later wrote that the schools policy of strict rote learning was harmful to creativity. At the end of December 1894 a letter from a doctor persuaded the Luitpolds authorities to release him from its care and he joined his family in Pavia. 28 While in Italy as a teenager he wrote an essay entitled On the Investigation of the State of the Ether in a Magnetic Field . 29 30 Einstein excelled at physics and mathematics from an early age and soon acquired the mathematical expertise normally only found in a child several years his senior. He began teaching himself algebra calculus and Euclidean geometry when he was twelve; he made such rapid progress that he discovered an original proof of the Pythagorean theorem before his thirteenth birthday. 31 32 33 A family tutor Max Talmud said that only a short time after he had given the twelve year old Einstein a geometry textbook the boy had worked through the whole book. He thereupon devoted himself to higher mathematics ... Soon the flight of his mathematical genius was so high I could not follow. 34 Einstein recorded that he had mastered integral and differential calculus while still just fourteen. 32 His love of algebra and geometry was so great that at twelve he was already confident that nature could be understood as a mathematical structure . 34 Einstein in 1893 age 14 Part of a series on Physical cosmology Big Bang Universe Age of the universe Chronology of the universe Early universe Inflation Nucleosynthesis Backgrounds Gravitational wave GWB Microwave CMB Neutrino CNB Expansion Future Hubbles law Redshift Expansion of the universe FLRW metric Friedmann equations Inhomogeneous cosmology Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Components Structure Components Lambda-CDM model Dark energy Dark matter Structure Shape of the universe Galaxy filament Galaxy formation Large quasar group Large-scale structure Reionization Structure formation Experiments Black Hole Initiative BHI BOOMERanG Cosmic Background Explorer COBE Dark Energy Survey Planck space observatory Sloan Digital Sky Survey SDSS 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey 2dF Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe WMAP Scientists Aaronson Alfven Alpher Copernicus de Sitter Dicke Ehlers Einstein Ellis Friedmann Galileo Gamow Guth Hawking Hubble Huygens Kepler Lemaitre Mather Newton Penrose Penzias Rubin Schmidt Smoot Suntzeff Sunyaev Tolman Wilson Zeldovich List of cosmologists Subject history Discovery of cosmic microwave background radiation History of the Big Bang theory Timeline of cosmological theories Category Astronomy portal v t e At thirteen when his range of enthusiasms had broadened to include music and philosophy 35 Talmud introduced Einstein to Kant s Critique of Pure Reason . Kant became his favorite philosopher; according to Talmud At the time he was still a child only thirteen years old yet Kants works incomprehensible to ordinary mortals seemed to be clear to him. 34 Einsteins Matura certificate 1896 note 2 In 1895 at the age of sixteen Einstein sat the entrance examination for the federal polytechnic school later the Eidgenossische Technische Hochschule ETH in Zurich Switzerland. He failed to reach the required standard in the general part of the test 36 but performed with distinction in physics and mathematics. 37 On the advice of the polytechnics principal he completed his secondary education at the Argovian cantonal school a gymnasium in Aarau Switzerland graduating in 1896. 38 While lodging in Aarau with the family of Jost Winteler he fell in love with Wintelers daughter Marie. His sister Maja later married Wintelers son Paul. 39 In January 1896 with his fathers approval Einstein renounced his citizenship of the German Kingdom of Wurttemberg in order to avoid conscription into military service . 40 The Matura graduation for the successful completion of higher secondary schooling awarded to him in September 1896 acknowledged him to have performed well across most of the curriculum allotting him a top grade of 6 for history physics algebra geometry and descriptive geometry. 41 At seventeen he enrolled in the four-year mathematics and physics teaching diploma program at the federal polytechnic school. Marie Winteler a year older than him took up a teaching post in Olsberg Switzerland. 39 The five other polytechnic school freshmen following the same course as Einstein included just one woman a twenty year old Serbian Mileva Maric . Over the next few years the pair spent many hours discussing their shared interests and learning about topics in physics that the polytechnic schools lectures did not cover. In his letters to Maric Einstein confessed that exploring science with her by his side was much more enjoyable than reading a textbook in solitude. Eventually the two students became not only friends but also lovers. 42 Historians of physics are divided on the question of the extent to which Maric contributed to the insights of Einsteins annus mirabilis publications. There is at least some evidence that he was influenced by her scientific ideas 42 43 44 but there are scholars who doubt whether her impact on his thought was of any great significance at all. 45 46 47 48 Marriages relationships and children Albert Einstein and Mileva Maric Einstein 1912 Albert Einstein and Elsa Einstein 1930 Correspondence between Einstein and Maric discovered and published in 1987 revealed that in early 1902 while Maric was visiting her parents in Novi Sad she gave birth to a daughter Lieserl . When Maric returned to Switzerland it was without the child whose fate is uncertain. A letter of Einsteins that he wrote in September 1903 suggests that the girl was either given up for adoption or died of scarlet fever in infancy. 49 50 Einstein and Maric married in January 1903. In May 1904 their son Hans Albert was born in Bern Switzerland. Their son Eduard was born in Zurich in July 1910. In letters that Einstein wrote to Marie Winteler in the months before Eduards arrival he described his love for his wife as misguided and mourned the missed life that he imagined he would have enjoyed if he had married Winteler instead: I think of you in heartfelt love every spare minute and am so unhappy as only a man can be. 51 In 1912 Einstein entered into a relationship with Elsa Lowenthal who was both his first cousin on his mothers side and his second cousin on his fathers. 52 53 54 When Maric learned of his infidelity soon after moving to Berlin with him in April 1914 she returned to Zurich taking Hans Albert and Eduard with her. 42 Einstein and Maric were granted a divorce on 14 February 1919 on the grounds of having lived apart for five years. 55 56 As part of the divorce settlement Einstein agreed that if he were to win a Nobel Prize he would give the money that he received to Maric; he won the prize two years later. 57 Einstein married Lowenthal in 1919. 58 59 In 1923 he began a relationship with a secretary named Betty Neumann the niece of his close friend Hans Muhsam. 60 61 62 63 Lowenthal nevertheless remained loyal to him accompanying him when he emigrated to the United States in 1933. In 1935 she was diagnosed with heart and kidney problems. She died in December 1936. 64 A volume of Einsteins letters released by Hebrew University of Jerusalem in 2006 65 added further names to the catalog of women with whom he was romantically involved. They included Margarete Lebach a married Austrian 66 Estella Katzenellenbogen the rich owner of a florist business Toni Mendel a wealthy Jewish widow and Ethel Michanowski a Berlin socialite with whom he spent time and from whom he accepted gifts while married to Lowenthal. 67 68 After being widowed Einstein was briefly in a relationship with Margarita Konenkova thought by some to be a Russian spy; her husband the Russian sculptor Sergei Konenkov created the bronze bust of Einstein at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton. 69 70 Following an episode of acute mental illness at about the age of twenty Einsteins son Eduard was diagnosed with schizophrenia . 71 He spent the remainder of his life either in the care of his mother or in temporary confinement in an asylum. After her death he was committed permanently to Burgholzli the Psychiatric University Hospital in Zurich. 72 19021909: Assistant at the Swiss Patent Office Einstein graduated from the federal polytechnic school in 1900 duly certified as competent to teach mathematics and physics. 73 His successful acquisition of Swiss citizenship in February 1901 74 was not followed by the usual sequel of conscription ; the Swiss authorities deemed him medically unfit for military service. He found that Swiss schools too appeared to have no use for him failing to offer him a teaching position despite the almost two years that he spent applying for one. Eventually it was with the help of Marcel Grossmann s father that he secured a post in Bern at the Swiss Patent Office 75 76 as an assistant examiner level III . 77 78 Patent applications that landed on Einsteins desk for his evaluation included ideas for a gravel sorter and an electric typewriter. 78 His employers were pleased enough with his work to make his position permanent in 1903 although they did not think that he should be promoted until he had fully mastered machine technology . 79 It is conceivable that his labors at the patent office had a bearing on his development of his special theory of relativity. He arrived at his revolutionary ideas about space time and light through thought experiments about the transmission of signals and the synchronization of clocks matters which also figured in some of the inventions submitted to him for assessment. 14 In 1902 Einstein and some friends whom he had met in Bern formed a group that held regular meetings to discuss science and philosophy. Their choice of a name for their club the Olympia Academy was an ironic comment upon its far from Olympian status. Sometimes they were joined by Maric who limited her participation in their proceedings to careful listening. 80 The thinkers whose works they reflected upon included Henri Poincare Ernst Mach and David Hume all of whom significantly influenced Einsteins own subsequent ideas and beliefs. 81 19001905: First scientific papers Einsteins 1905 dissertation Eine neue Bestimmung der Molekuldimensione A new determination of molecular dimensions Einsteins first paper Folgerungen aus den Capillaritatserscheinungen Conclusions drawn from the phenomena of capillarity in which he proposed a model of intermolecular attraction that he afterwards disavowed as worthless was published in the journal Annalen der Physik in 1901. 82 83 His 24-page doctoral dissertation also addressed a topic in molecular physics. Titled Eine neue Bestimmung der Molekuldimensionen A New Determination of Molecular Dimensions and dedicated to his friend Marcel Grossman it was completed on 30 April 1905 84 and approved by Professor Alfred Kleiner of the University of Zurich three months later. Einstein was formally awarded his PhD on 15 January 1906. 84 85 86 Four other pieces of work that Einstein completed in 1905 his famous papers on the photoelectric effect Brownian motion his special theory of relativity and the equivalence of mass and energy have led to the year being celebrated as an annus mirabilis for physics akin to 1666 the year in which Isaac Newton experienced his greatest epiphanies. The publications deeply impressed Einsteins contemporaries. 87 19081933: Early academic career Einsteins sabbatical as a civil servant approached its end in 1908 when he secured a junior teaching position at the University of Bern . In 1909 a lecture on relativistic electrodynamics that he gave at the University of Zurich much admired by Alfred Kleiner led to Zurichs luring him away from Bern with a newly created associate professorship. 88 Promotion to a full professorship followed in April 1911 when he accepted a chair at the German Charles-Ferdinand University in Prague a move which required him to become an Austrian citizen of the Austro-Hungarian Empire . 89 90 His time in Prague saw him producing eleven research papers. 91 Einstein in 1904 age 25 Olympia Academy founders: Conrad Habicht Maurice Solovine and Einstein In July 1912 he returned to his alma mater the ETH Zurich to take up a chair in theoretical physics. His teaching activities there centred on thermodynamics and analytical mechanics and his research interests included the molecular theory of heat continuum mechanics and the development of a relativistic theory of gravitation. In his work on the latter topic he was assisted by his friend Marcel Grossmann whose knowledge of the kind of mathematics required was greater than his own. 92 In the spring of 1913 two German visitors Max Planck and Walther Nernst called upon Einstein in Zurich in the hope of persuading him to relocate to Berlin. 93 They offered him membership of the Prussian Academy of Sciences the directorship of the planned Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics and a chair at the Humboldt University of Berlin that would allow him to pursue his research supported by a professorial salary but with no teaching duties to burden him. 53 Their invitation was all the more appealing to him because Berlin happened to be the home of his latest girlfriend Elsa Lowenthal. 93 He duly joined the Academy on 24 July 1913 94 and moved into an apartment in the Berlin district of Dahlem on 1 April 1914. 53 He was installed in his Humboldt University position shortly thereafter. 94 The outbreak of the First World War in July 1914 marked the beginning of Einsteins gradual estrangement from the nation of his birth. When the Manifesto of the Ninety-Three was published in October 1914a document signed by a host of prominent German thinkers that justified Germanys belligerenceEinstein was one of the few German intellectuals to distance himself from it and sign the alternative eirenic Manifesto to the Europeans instead. 95 96 However this expression of his doubts about German policy did not prevent him from being elected to a two-year term as president of the German Physical Society in 1916. 97 When the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physics opened its doors the following yearits foundation delayed because of the warEinstein was appointed its first director just as Planck and Nernst had promised. 98 Einstein was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1920 99 and a Foreign Member of the Royal Society in 1921 . In 1922 he was awarded the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics for his services to Theoretical Physics and especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect . 8 At this point some physicists still regarded the general theory of relativity skeptically and the Nobel citation displayed a degree of doubt even about the work on photoelectricity that it acknowledged: it did not assent to Einsteins notion of the particulate nature of light which only won over the entire scientific community when S. N. Bose derived the Planck spectrum in 1924. That same year Einstein was elected an International Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences . 100 Britains closest equivalent of the Nobel award the Royal Society s Copley Medal was not hung around Einsteins neck until 1925. 1 He was elected an International Member of the American Philosophical Society in 1930. 101 Einstein resigned from the Prussian Academy in March 1933. His accomplishments in Berlin had included the completion of the general theory of relativity proving the Einsteinde Haas effect contributing to the quantum theory of radiation and the development of BoseEinstein statistics . 53 1919: Putting general relativity to the test The New York Times reported confirmation of the bending of light by gravitation after observations made in Principe and Sobral of the 29 May 1919 eclipse were presented to a joint meeting in London of the Royal Society and the Royal Astronomical Society on 6 November 1919. 102 In 1907 Einstein reached a milestone on his long journey from his special theory of relativity to a new idea of gravitation with the formulation of his equivalence principle which asserts that an observer in an infinitesimally small box falling freely in a gravitational field would be unable to find any evidence that the field exists. In 1911 he used the principle to estimate the amount by which a ray of light from a distant star would be bent by the gravitational pull of the Sun as it passed close to the Suns photosphere that is the Suns apparent surface. He reworked his calculation in 1913 having now found a way to model gravitation with the Riemann curvature tensor of a non-Euclidean four-dimensional spacetime . By the fall of 1915 his reimagining of the mathematics of gravitation in terms of Riemannian geometry was complete and he applied his new theory not just to the behavior of the Sun as a gravitational lens but also to another astronomical phenomenon the precession of the perihelion of Mercury a slow drift in the point in Mercurys elliptical orbit at which it approaches the Sun most closely. 53 103 A total eclipse of the Sun that took place on 29 May 1919 provided an opportunity to put his theory of gravitational lensing to the test and observations performed by Sir Arthur Eddington yielded results that were consistent with his calculations. Eddingtons work was reported at length in newspapers around the world. On 7 November 1919 for example the leading British newspaper The Times printed a banner headline that read: Revolution in Science New Theory of the Universe Newtonian Ideas Overthrown . 104 19211923: Coming to terms with fame Einsteins official portrait after receiving the 1921 Nobel Prize for Physics With Eddingtons eclipse observations widely reported not just in academic journals but by the popular press as well Einstein became perhaps the worlds first celebrity scientist a genius who had shattered a paradigm that had been basic to physicists understanding of the universe since the seventeenth century. 105 Einstein began his new life as an intellectual icon in America where he arrived on 2 April 1921. He was welcomed to New York City by Mayor John Francis Hylan and then spent three weeks giving lectures and attending receptions. 106 He spoke several times at Columbia University and Princeton and in Washington he visited the White House with representatives of the National Academy of Sciences . He returned to Europe via London where he was the guest of the philosopher and statesman Viscount Haldane . He used his time in the British capital to meet several people prominent in British scientific political or intellectual life and to deliver a lecture at Kings College . 107 108 In July 1921 he published an essay My First Impression of the U.S.A. in which he sought to sketch the American character much as had Alexis de Tocqueville in Democracy in America 1835. 109 He wrote of his transatlantic hosts in highly approving terms: What strikes a visitor is the joyous positive attitude to life ... The American is friendly self-confident optimistic and without envy. 110 In 1922 Einsteins travels were to the old world rather than the new. He devoted six months to a tour of Asia that saw him speaking in Japan Singapore and Sri Lanka then known as Ceylon . After his first public lecture in Tokyo he met Emperor Yoshihito and his wife at the Imperial Palace with thousands of spectators thronging the streets in the hope of catching a glimpse of him. In a letter to his sons he wrote that Japanese people seemed to him to be generally modest intelligent and considerate and to have a true appreciation of art. 111 But his picture of them in his diary was less flattering: the intellectual needs of this nation seem to be weaker than their artistic ones natural disposition? His journal also contains views of China and India which were uncomplimentary. Of Chinese people he wrote that even the children are spiritless and look obtuse... It would be a pity if these Chinese supplant all other races. For the likes of us the mere thought is unspeakably dreary . 112 113 He was greeted with even greater enthusiasm on the last leg of his tour in which he spent twelve days in Mandatory Palestine newly entrusted to British rule by the League of Nations in the aftermath of the First World War. Sir Herbert Samuel the British High Commissioner welcomed him with a degree of ceremony normally only accorded to a visiting head of state including a cannon salute. One reception held in his honor was stormed by people determined to hear him speak: he told them that he was happy that Jews were beginning to be recognized as a force in the world. 114 Einsteins decision to tour the eastern hemisphere in 1922 meant that he was unable to go to Stockholm in the December of that year to participate in the Nobel prize ceremony. His place at the traditional Nobel banquet was taken by a German diplomat who gave a speech praising him not only as a physicist but also as a campaigner for peace. 115 A two-week visit to Spain that he undertook in 1923 saw him collecting another award a membership of the Spanish Academy of Sciences signified by a diploma handed to him by King Alfonso XIII . His Spanish trip also gave him a chance to meet a fellow Nobel laureate the neuroanatomist Santiago Ramon y Cajal . 116 19221932: Serving the League of Nations Einstein at a session of the International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation League of Nations of which he was a member from 1922 to 1932 From 1922 until 1932 with the exception of a few months in 1923 and 1924 Einstein was a member of the Geneva-based International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation of the League of Nations a group set up by the League to encourage scientists artists scholars teachers and other people engaged in the life of the mind to work more closely with their counterparts in other countries. 117 118 He was appointed as a German delegate rather than as a representative of Switzerland because of the machinations of two Catholic activists Oskar Halecki and Giuseppe Motta . By persuading Secretary General Eric Drummond to deny Einstein the place on the committee reserved for a Swiss thinker they created an opening for Gonzague de Reynold who used his League of Nations position as a platform from which to promote traditional Catholic doctrine. 119 Einsteins former physics professor Hendrik Lorentz and the Polish chemist Marie Curie were also members of the committee. 120 1925: Touring South America In March and April 1925 Einstein and his wife visited South America where they spent about a week in Brazil a week in Uruguay and a month in Argentina. 121 Their tour was suggested by Jorge Duclout 18561927 and Mauricio Nirenstein 18771935 122 with the support of several Argentine scholars including Julio Rey Pastor Jakob Laub and Leopoldo Lugones . and was financed primarily by the Council of the University of Buenos Aires and the Asociacion Hebraica Argentina Argentine Hebraic Association with a smaller contribution from the Argentine-Germanic Cultural Institution. 123 19301931: Touring the US In December 1930 Einstein began another significant sojourn in the United States drawn back to the US by the offer of a two month research fellowship at the California Institute of Technology . Caltech supported him in his wish that he should not be exposed to quite as much attention from the media as he had experienced when visiting the US in 1921 and he therefore declined all the invitations to receive prizes or make speeches that his admirers poured down upon him. But he remained willing to allow his fans at least some of the time with him that they requested. 124 After arriving in New York City Einstein was taken to various places and events including Chinatown a lunch with the editors of The New York Times and a performance of Carmen at the Metropolitan Opera where he was cheered by the audience on his arrival. During the days following he was given the keys to the city by Mayor Jimmy Walker and met Nicholas Murray Butler the president of Columbia University who described Einstein as the ruling monarch of the mind . 125 Harry Emerson Fosdick pastor at New Yorks Riverside Church gave Einstein a tour of the church and showed him a full-size statue that the church made of Einstein standing at the entrance. 125 Also during his stay in New York he joined a crowd of 15 000 people at Madison Square Garden during a Hanukkah celebration. 125 Einstein with Charlie Chaplin at the Hollywood premiere of Chaplins City Lights January 1931 Einstein next traveled to California where he met Caltech president and Nobel laureate Robert A. Millikan . His friendship with Millikan was awkward as Millikan had a penchant for patriotic militarism where Einstein was a pronounced pacifist . 126 During an address to Caltechs students Einstein noted that science was often inclined to do more harm than good. 127 This aversion to war also led Einstein to befriend author Upton Sinclair and film star Charlie Chaplin both noted for their pacifism. Carl Laemmle head of Universal Studios gave Einstein a tour of his studio and introduced him to Chaplin. They had an instant rapport with Chaplin inviting Einstein and his wife Elsa to his home for dinner. Chaplin said Einsteins outward persona calm and gentle seemed to conceal a highly emotional temperament from which came his extraordinary intellectual energy . 128 Chaplins film City Lights was to premiere a few days later in Hollywood and Chaplin invited Einstein and Elsa to join him as his special guests. Walter Isaacson Einsteins biographer described this as one of the most memorable scenes in the new era of celebrity . 127 Chaplin visited Einstein at his home on a later trip to Berlin and recalled his modest little flat and the piano at which he had begun writing his theory. Chaplin speculated that it was possibly used as kindling wood by the Nazis . 129 1933: Emigration to the US Cartoon of Einstein after shedding his pacifism wings Charles R. Macauley c. 1933 In February 1933 while on a visit to the United States Einstein knew he could not return to Germany with the rise to power of the Nazis under Germanys new chancellor Adolf Hitler . 130 131 While at American universities in early 1933 he undertook his third two-month visiting professorship at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena. In February and March 1933 the Gestapo repeatedly raided his familys apartment in Berlin. 132 He and his wife Elsa returned to Europe in March and during the trip they learned that the German Reichstag had passed the Enabling Act on 23 March transforming Hitlers government into a de facto legal dictatorship and that they would not be able to proceed to Berlin. Later on they heard that their cottage had been raided by the Nazis and Einsteins personal sailboat confiscated. Upon landing in Antwerp Belgium on 28 March Einstein immediately went to the German consulate and surrendered his passport formally renouncing his German citizenship. 133 The Nazis later sold his boat and converted his cottage into a Hitler Youth camp. 134 Refugee status Landing card for Einsteins 26 May 1933 arrival in Dover England from Ostend Belgium 135 enroute to Oxford 4 In April 1933 Einstein discovered that the new German government had passed laws barring Jews from holding any official positions including teaching at universities. 133 Historian Gerald Holton describes how with virtually no audible protest being raised by their colleagues thousands of Jewish scientists were suddenly forced to give up their university positions and their names were removed from the rolls of institutions where they were employed. 136 A month later Einsteins works were among those targeted by the German Student Union in the Nazi book burnings with Nazi propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels proclaiming Jewish intellectualism is dead. 133 One German magazine included him in a list of enemies of the German regime with the phrase not yet hanged offering a 5 000 bounty on his head. 133 137 In a subsequent letter to physicist and friend Max Born who had already emigrated from Germany to England Einstein wrote ... I must confess that the degree of their brutality and cowardice came as something of a surprise. 133 After moving to the US he described the book burnings as a spontaneous emotional outburst by those who shun popular enlightenment and more than anything else in the world fear the influence of men of intellectual independence . 138 Einstein was now without a permanent home unsure where he would live and work and equally worried about the fate of countless other scientists still in Germany. Aided by the Academic Assistance Council founded in April 1933 by British Liberal politician William Beveridge to help academics escape Nazi persecution Einstein was able to leave Germany. 139 He rented a house in De Haan Belgium where he lived for a few months. In late July 1933 he visited England for about six weeks at the invitation of the British Member of Parliament Commander Oliver Locker-Lampson who had become friends with him in the preceding years. 135 Locker-Lampson invited him to stay near his Cromer home in a secluded wooden cabin on Roughton Heath in the Parish of Roughton Norfolk . To protect Einstein Locker-Lampson had two bodyguards watch over him; a photo of them carrying shotguns and guarding Einstein was published in the Daily Herald on 24 July 1933. 140 141 Winston Churchill and Einstein at Chartwell House 31 May 1933 Locker-Lampson took Einstein to meet Winston Churchill at his home and later Austen Chamberlain and former Prime Minister Lloyd George . 142 Einstein asked them to help bring Jewish scientists out of Germany. British historian Martin Gilbert notes that Churchill responded immediately and sent his friend physicist Frederick Lindemann to Germany to seek out Jewish scientists and place them in British universities. 143 Churchill later observed that as a result of Germany having driven the Jews out they had lowered their technical standards and put the Allies technology ahead of theirs. 143 Einstein later contacted leaders of other nations including Turkeys Prime Minister Ismet Inonu to whom he wrote in September 1933 requesting placement of unemployed German-Jewish scientists. As a result of Einsteins letter Jewish invitees to Turkey eventually totaled over 1 000 saved individuals . 144 Locker-Lampson also submitted a bill to parliament to extend British citizenship to Einstein during which period Einstein made a number of public appearances describing the crisis brewing in Europe. 145 In one of his speeches he denounced Germanys treatment of Jews while at the same time he introduced a bill promoting Jewish citizenship in Palestine as they were being denied citizenship elsewhere. 146 In his speech he described Einstein as a citizen of the world who should be offered a temporary shelter in the UK. note 3 147 Both bills failed however and Einstein then accepted an earlier offer from the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton New Jersey US to become a resident scholar. 145 Resident scholar at the Institute for Advanced Study Portrait of Einstein taken in 1935 at Princeton On 3 October 1933 Einstein delivered a speech on the importance of academic freedom before a packed audience at the Royal Albert Hall in London with The Times reporting he was wildly cheered throughout. 139 Four days later he returned to the US and took up a position at the Institute for Advanced Study 145 148 noted for having become a refuge for scientists fleeing Nazi Germany. 149 At the time most American universities including Harvard Princeton and Yale had minimal or no Jewish faculty or students as a result of their Jewish quotas which lasted until the late 1940s. 149 Einstein was still undecided about his future. He had offers from several European universities including Christ Church Oxford where he stayed for three short periods between May 1931 and June 1933 4 and was offered a five-year research fellowship called a studentship at Christ Church 150 151 but in 1935 he arrived at the decision to remain permanently in the United States and apply for citizenship. 145 152 Einsteins affiliation with the Institute for Advanced Study would last until his death in 1955. 153 He was one of the four first selected along with John von Neumann Kurt Godel and Hermann Weyl 154 at the new Institute. He soon developed a close friendship with Godel; the two would take long walks together discussing their work. Bruria Kaufman his assistant later became a physicist. During this period Einstein tried to develop a unified field theory and to refute the accepted interpretation of quantum physics both unsuccessfully. He lived in Princeton at his home from 1935 onwards. The Albert Einstein House was made a National Historic Landmark in 1976. World War II and the Manhattan Project See also: EinsteinSzilard letter Marble bust of Einstein at the Deutsches Museum in Munich In 1939 a group of Hungarian scientists that included emigre physicist Leo Szilard attempted to alert Washington to ongoing Nazi atomic bomb research. The groups warnings were discounted. Einstein and Szilard along with other refugees such as Edward Teller and Eugene Wigner regarded it as their responsibility to alert Americans to the possibility that German scientists might win the race to build an atomic bomb and to warn that Hitler would be more than willing to resort to such a weapon. 155 156 To make certain the US was aware of the danger in July 1939 a few months before the beginning of World War II in Europe Szilard and Wigner visited Einstein to explain the possibility of atomic bombs which Einstein a pacifist said he had never considered. 157 He was asked to lend his support by writing a letter with Szilard to President Roosevelt recommending the US pay attention and engage in its own nuclear weapons research. The letter is believed to be arguably the key stimulus for the U.S. adoption of serious investigations into nuclear weapons on the eve of the U.S. entry into World War II . 158 In addition to the letter Einstein used his connections with the Belgian royal family 159 and the Belgian queen mother to get access with a personal envoy to the White Houses Oval Office. Some say that as a result of Einsteins letter and his meetings with Roosevelt the US entered the race to develop the bomb drawing on its immense material financial and scientific resources to initiate the Manhattan Project . For Einstein war was a disease ... and he called for resistance to war. By signing the letter to Roosevelt some argue he went against his pacifist principles. 160 In 1954 a year before his death Einstein said to his old friend Linus Pauling I made one great mistake in my lifewhen I signed the letter to President Roosevelt recommending that atom bombs be made; but there was some justificationthe danger that the Germans would make them ... 161 In 1955 Einstein and ten other intellectuals and scientists including British philosopher Bertrand Russell signed a manifesto highlighting the danger of nuclear weapons. 162 In 1960 Einstein was included posthumously as a charter member of the World Academy of Art and Science WAAS 163 an organization founded by distinguished scientists and intellectuals who committed themselves to the responsible and ethical advances of science particularly in light of the development of nuclear weapons. US citizenship Einstein accepting a US citizenship certificate from judge Phillip Forman Einstein became an American citizen in 1940. Not long after settling into his career at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton New Jersey he expressed his appreciation of the meritocracy in American culture compared to Europe. He recognized the right of individuals to say and think what they pleased without social barriers. As a result individuals were encouraged he said to be more creative a trait he valued from his early education. 164 Einstein joined the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People NAACP in Princeton where he campaigned for the civil rights of African Americans. He considered racism Americas worst disease 137 165 seeing it as handed down from one generation to the next . 166 As part of his involvement he corresponded with civil rights activist W. E. B. Du Bois and was prepared to testify on his behalf during his trial as an alleged foreign agent in 1951. 167 When Einstein offered to be a character witness for Du Bois the judge decided to drop the case. 168 In 1946 Einstein visited Lincoln University in Pennsylvania a historically black college where he was awarded an honorary degree. Lincoln was the first university in the United States to grant college degrees to African Americans; alumni include Langston Hughes and Thurgood Marshall . Einstein gave a speech about racism in America adding I do not intend to be quiet about it. 169 A resident of Princeton recalls that Einstein had once paid the college tuition for a black student. 168 Einstein has said Being a Jew myself perhaps I can understand and empathize with how black people feel as victims of discrimination . 165 Personal views Political views Main article: Political views of Albert Einstein Albert Einstein and Elsa Einstein arriving in New York in 1921. Accompanying them are Zionist leaders Chaim Weizmann future president of Israel Weizmanns wife Vera Weizmann Menahem Ussishkin and Ben-Zion Mossinson. In 1918 Einstein was one of the signatories of the founding proclamation of the German Democratic Party a liberal party. 170 171 Later in his life Einsteins political view was in favor of socialism and critical of capitalism which he detailed in his essays such as Why Socialism? . 172 173 His opinions on the Bolsheviks also changed with time. In 1925 he criticized them for not having a well-regulated system of government and called their rule a regime of terror and a tragedy in human history . He later adopted a more moderated view criticizing their methods but praising them which is shown by his 1929 remark on Vladimir Lenin : In Lenin I honor a man who in total sacrifice of his own person has committed his entire energy to realizing social justice. I do not find his methods advisable. One thing is certain however: men like him are the guardians and renewers of mankinds conscience. 174 Einstein offered and was called on to give judgments and opinions on matters often unrelated to theoretical physics or mathematics. 145 He strongly advocated the idea of a democratic global government that would check the power of nation-states in the framework of a world federation. 175 He wrote I advocate world government because I am convinced that there is no other possible way of eliminating the most terrible danger in which man has ever found himself. 176 The FBI created a secret dossier on Einstein in 1932; by the time of his death it was 1 427 pages long. 177 Einstein was deeply impressed by Mahatma Gandhi with whom he corresponded. He described Gandhi as a role model for the generations to come . 178 The initial connection was established on 27 September 1931 when Wilfrid Israel took his Indian guest V. A. Sundaram to meet his friend Einstein at his summer home in the town of Caputh. Sundaram was Gandhis disciple and special envoy whom Wilfrid Israel met while visiting India and visiting the Indian leaders home in 1925. During the visit Einstein wrote a short letter to Gandhi that was delivered to him through his envoy and Gandhi responded quickly with his own letter. Although in the end Einstein and Gandhi were unable to meet as they had hoped the direct connection between them was established through Wilfrid Israel. 179 Relationship with Zionism Main article: Political views of Albert Einstein Zionism Einstein in 1947 Einstein was a figurehead leader in the establishment of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem 180 which opened in 1925. 181 Earlier in 1921 he was asked by the biochemist and president of the World Zionist Organization Chaim Weizmann to help raise funds for the planned university. 182 He made suggestions for the creation of an Institute of Agriculture a Chemical Institute and an Institute of Microbiology in order to fight the various ongoing epidemics such as malaria which he called an evil that was undermining a third of the countrys development. 183 He also promoted the establishment of an Oriental Studies Institute to include language courses given in both Hebrew and Arabic. 184 Einstein was not a nationalist and opposed the creation of an independent Jewish state. 185 He felt that the waves of arriving Jews of the Aliyah could live alongside existing Arabs in Palestine . The state of Israel was established without his help in 1948; Einstein was limited to a marginal role in the Zionist movement . 186 Upon the death of Israeli president Weizmann in November 1952 Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion offered Einstein the largely ceremonial position of President of Israel at the urging of Ezriel Carlebach . 187 188 The offer was presented by Israels ambassador in Washington Abba Eban who explained that the offer embodies the deepest respect which the Jewish people can repose in any of its sons . 189 Einstein wrote that he was deeply moved but at once saddened and ashamed that he could not accept it. 189 Religious and philosophical views Opening of Einsteins speech 11 April 1943 for the United Jewish Appeal recording by Radio Universidad Nacional de La Plata Argentina Ladies coughs and gentlemen our age is proud of the progress it has made in mans intellectual development. The search and striving for truth and knowledge is one of the highest of mans qualities ... Main article: Religious and philosophical views of Albert Einstein Per Lee Smolin I believe what allowed Einstein to achieve so much was primarily a moral quality. He simply cared far more than most of his colleagues that the laws of physics have to explain everything in nature coherently and consistently. 190 Einstein expounded his spiritual outlook in a wide array of writings and interviews. 191 He said he had sympathy for the impersonal pantheistic God of Baruch Spinozas philosophy . 192 He did not believe in a personal god who concerns himself with fates and actions of human beings a view which he described as naive. 193 He clarified however that I am not an atheist 194 preferring to call himself an agnostic 195 196 or a deeply religious nonbeliever . 193 He wrote that A spirit is manifest in the laws of the universea spirit vastly superior to that of man and one in the face of which we with our modest powers must feel humble. In this way the pursuit of science leads to a religious feeling of a special sort. 197 Einstein was primarily affiliated with non-religious humanist and Ethical Culture groups in both the UK and US. He served on the advisory board of the First Humanist Society of New York 198 and was an honorary associate of the Rationalist Association which publishes New Humanist in Britain. For the 75th anniversary of the New York Society for Ethical Culture he stated that the idea of Ethical Culture embodied his personal conception of what is most valuable and enduring in religious idealism. He observed Without ethical culture there is no salvation for humanity. 199 In a German-language letter to philosopher Eric Gutkind dated 3 January 1954 Einstein wrote: The word God is for me nothing more than the expression and product of human weaknesses the Bible a collection of honorable but still primitive legends which are nevertheless pretty childish. No interpretation no matter how subtle can for me change this. ... For me the Jewish religion like all other religions is an incarnation of the most childish superstitions. And the Jewish people to whom I gladly belong and with whose mentality I have a deep affinity have no different quality for me than all other people. ... I cannot see anything chosen about them. 200 Einstein had been sympathetic toward vegetarianism for a long time. In a letter in 1930 to Hermann Huth vice-president of the German Vegetarian Federation Deutsche Vegetarier-Bund he wrote: Although I have been prevented by outward circumstances from observing a strictly vegetarian diet I have long been an adherent to the cause in principle. Besides agreeing with the aims of vegetarianism for aesthetic and moral reasons it is my view that a vegetarian manner of living by its purely physical effect on the human temperament would most beneficially influence the lot of mankind. 201 He became a vegetarian himself only during the last part of his life. In March 1954 he wrote in a letter: So I am living without fats without meat without fish but am feeling quite well this way. It almost seems to me that man was not born to be a carnivore. 202 Love of music Einstein playing the violin image published in 1927 Einstein developed an appreciation for music at an early age. In his late journals he wrote: If I were not a physicist I would probably be a musician. I often think in music. I live my daydreams in music. I see my life in terms of music ... I get most joy in life out of music. 203 204 His mother played the piano reasonably well and wanted her son to learn the violin not only to instill in him a love of music but also to help him assimilate into German culture . According to conductor Leon Botstein Einstein began playing when he was 5. However he did not enjoy it at that age. 205 When he turned 13 he discovered the violin sonatas of Mozart whereupon he became enamored of Mozart s compositions and studied music more willingly. Einstein taught himself to play without ever practicing systematically . He said that love is a better teacher than a sense of duty . 205 At the age of 17 he was heard by a school examiner in Aarau while playing Beethovens violin sonatas . The examiner stated afterward that his playing was remarkable and revealing of great insight . What struck the examiner writes Botstein was that Einstein displayed a deep love of the music a quality that was and remains in short supply. Music possessed an unusual meaning for this student. 205 Music took on a pivotal and permanent role in Einsteins life from that period on. Although the idea of becoming a professional musician himself was not on his mind at any time among those with whom Einstein played chamber music were a few professionals including Kurt Appelbaum and he performed for private audiences and friends. Chamber music had also become a regular part of his social life while living in Bern Zurich and Berlin where he played with Max Planck and his son among others. He is sometimes erroneously credited as the editor of the 1937 edition of the Kochel catalog of Mozarts work; that edition was prepared by Alfred Einstein who may have been a distant relation. 206 207 In 1931 while engaged in research at the California Institute of Technology he visited the Zoellner family conservatory in Los Angeles where he played some of Beethoven and Mozarts works with members of the Zoellner Quartet . 208 209 Near the end of his life when the young Juilliard Quartet visited him in Princeton he played his violin with them and the quartet was impressed by Einsteins level of coordination and intonation . 205 Death On 17 April 1955 Einstein experienced internal bleeding caused by the rupture of an abdominal aortic aneurysm which had previously been reinforced surgically by Rudolph Nissen in 1948. 210 He took the draft of a speech he was preparing for a television appearance commemorating the state of Israels seventh anniversary with him to the hospital but he did not live to complete it. 211 Einstein refused surgery saying I want to go when I want. It is tasteless to prolong life artificially. I have done my share; it is time to go. I will do it elegantly. 212 He died in the Princeton Hospital early the next morning at the age of 76 having continued to work until near the end. 213 During the autopsy the pathologist Thomas Stoltz Harvey removed Einsteins brain for preservation without the permission of his family in the hope that the neuroscience of the future would be able to discover what made Einstein so intelligent. 214 Einsteins remains were cremated in Trenton New Jersey 215 and his ashes were scattered at an undisclosed location. 216 217 In a memorial lecture delivered on 13 December 1965 at UNESCO headquarters nuclear physicist J. Robert Oppenheimer summarized his impression of Einstein as a person: He was almost wholly without sophistication and wholly without worldliness ... There was always with him a wonderful purity at once childlike and profoundly stubborn. 218 Einstein bequeathed his personal archives library and intellectual assets to the Hebrew University of Jerusalem in Israel. 219 Scientific career Throughout his life Einstein published hundreds of books and articles. 21 220 He published more than 300 scientific papers and 150 non-scientific ones. 15 220 On 5 December 2014 universities and archives announced the release of Einsteins papers comprising more than 30 000 unique documents. 221 222 In addition to the work he did by himself he also collaborated with other scientists on additional projects including the BoseEinstein statistics the Einstein refrigerator and others. 223 224 Statistical mechanics Thermodynamic fluctuations and statistical physics Main articles: Statistical mechanics thermal fluctuations and statistical physics Einsteins first paper 82 225 submitted in 1900 to Annalen der Physik was on capillary attraction . It was published in 1901 with the title Folgerungen aus den Capillaritatserscheinungen which translates as Conclusions from the capillarity phenomena . Two papers he published in 19021903 thermodynamics attempted to interpret atomic phenomena from a statistical point of view. These papers were the foundation for the 1905 paper on Brownian motion which showed that Brownian movement can be construed as firm evidence that molecules exist. His research in 1903 and 1904 was mainly concerned with the effect of finite atomic size on diffusion phenomena. 225 Theory of critical opalescence Main article: Critical opalescence Einstein returned to the problem of thermodynamic fluctuations giving a treatment of the density variations in a fluid at its critical point. Ordinarily the density fluctuations are controlled by the second derivative of the free energy with respect to the density. At the critical point this derivative is zero leading to large fluctuations. The effect of density fluctuations is that light of all wavelengths is scattered making the fluid look milky white. Einstein relates this to Rayleigh scattering which is what happens when the fluctuation size is much smaller than the wavelength and which explains why the sky is blue. 226 Einstein quantitatively derived critical opalescence from a treatment of density fluctuations and demonstrated how both the effect and Rayleigh scattering originate from the atomistic constitution of matter. 1905 Annus Mirabilis papers The Annus Mirabilis papers are four articles pertaining to the photoelectric effect which gave rise to quantum theory Brownian motion the special theory of relativity and E mc 2 that Einstein published in the Annalen der Physik scientific journal in 1905. These four works contributed substantially to the foundation of modern physics and changed views on space time and matter . The four papers are: Title translated Area of focus Received Published Significance On a Heuristic Viewpoint Concerning the Production and Transformation of Light 227 Photoelectric effect 18 March 9 June Resolved an unsolved puzzle by suggesting that energy is exchanged only in discrete amounts quanta . 228 This idea was pivotal to the early development of quantum theory. 229 On the Motion of Small Particles Suspended in a Stationary Liquid as Required by the Molecular Kinetic Theory of Heat 230 Brownian motion 11 May 18 July Explained empirical evidence for the atomic theory supporting the application of statistical physics . On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies 231 Special relativity 30 June 26 September Reconciled Maxwell s equations for electricity and magnetism with the laws of mechanics by introducing changes to mechanics resulting from analysis based on empirical evidence that the speed of light is independent of the motion of the observer. 232 specify Discredited the concept of a luminiferous ether . 233 Does the Inertia of a Body Depend Upon Its Energy Content? 234 Matterenergy equivalence 27 September 21 November Equivalence of matter and energy E mc 2 the existence of rest energy and the basis of nuclear energy. Special relativity Main article: History of special relativity Einsteins Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter Korper 231 On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies was received on 30 June 1905 and published 26 September of that same year. It reconciled conflicts between Maxwells equations the laws of electricity and magnetism and the laws of Newtonian mechanics by introducing changes to the laws of mechanics. 235 Observationally the effects of these changes are most apparent at high speeds where objects are moving at speeds close to the speed of light . The theory developed in this paper later became known as Einsteins special theory of relativity. This paper predicted that when measured in the frame of a relatively moving observer a clock carried by a moving body would appear to slow down and the body itself would contract in its direction of motion. This paper also argued that the idea of a luminiferous aether one of the leading theoretical entities in physics at the timewas superfluous. note 4 In his paper on massenergy equivalence Einstein produced E mc 2 as a consequence of his special relativity equations. 236 Einsteins 1905 work on relativity remained controversial for many years but was accepted by leading physicists starting with Max Planck . note 5 237 Einstein originally framed special relativity in terms of kinematics the study of moving bodies. In 1908 Hermann Minkowski reinterpreted special relativity in geometric terms as a theory of spacetime . Einstein adopted Minkowskis formalism in his 1915 general theory of relativity . 238 General relativity General relativity and the equivalence principle Main article: History of general relativity See also: Theory of relativity and Einstein field equations Eddington s photograph of a solar eclipse General relativity GR is a theory of gravitation that was developed by Einstein between 1907 and 1915. According to it the observed gravitational attraction between masses results from the warping of spacetime by those masses. General relativity has developed into an essential tool in modern astrophysics ; it provides the foundation for the current understanding of black holes regions of space where gravitational attraction is so strong that not even light can escape. 239 As Einstein later said the reason for the development of general relativity was that the preference of inertial motions within special relativity was unsatisfactory while a theory which from the outset prefers no state of motion even accelerated ones should appear more satisfactory. 240 Consequently in 1907 he published an article on acceleration under special relativity. In that article titled On the Relativity Principle and the Conclusions Drawn from It he argued that free fall is really inertial motion and that for a free-falling observer the rules of special relativity must apply. This argument is called the equivalence principle . In the same article Einstein also predicted the phenomena of gravitational time dilation gravitational redshift and gravitational lensing . 241 242 In 1911 Einstein published another article On the Influence of Gravitation on the Propagation of Light expanding on the 1907 article in which he estimated the amount of deflection of light by massive bodies. Thus the theoretical prediction of general relativity could for the first time be tested experimentally. 243 Gravitational waves In 1916 Einstein predicted gravitational waves 244 245 ripples in the curvature of spacetime which propagate as waves traveling outward from the source transporting energy as gravitational radiation. The existence of gravitational waves is possible under general relativity due to its Lorentz invariance which brings the concept of a finite speed of propagation of the physical interactions of gravity with it. By contrast gravitational waves cannot exist in the Newtonian theory of gravitation which postulates that the physical interactions of gravity propagate at infinite speed. The first indirect detection of gravitational waves came in the 1970s through observation of a pair of closely orbiting neutron stars PSR B191316 . 246 The explanation for the decay in their orbital period was that they were emitting gravitational waves. 246 247 Einsteins prediction was confirmed on 11 February 2016 when researchers at LIGO published the first observation of gravitational waves 248 detected on Earth on 14 September 2015 nearly one hundred years after the prediction. 246 249 250 251 252 Hole argument and Entwurf theory While developing general relativity Einstein became confused about the gauge invariance in the theory. He formulated an argument that led him to conclude that a general relativistic field theory is impossible. He gave up looking for fully generally covariant tensor equations and searched for equations that would be invariant under general linear transformations only. 253 In June 1913 the Entwurf draft theory was the result of these investigations. As its name suggests it was a sketch of a theory less elegant and more difficult than general relativity with the equations of motion supplemented by additional gauge fixing conditions. After more than two years of intensive work Einstein realized that the hole argument was mistaken 254 and abandoned the theory in November 1915. Physical cosmology Main article: Physical cosmology Robert A. Millikan Georges Lemaitre and Einstein at the California Institute of Technology in January 1933 In 1917 Einstein applied the general theory of relativity to the structure of the universe as a whole. 255 He discovered that the general field equations predicted a universe that was dynamic either contracting or expanding. As observational evidence for a dynamic universe was lacking at the time Einstein introduced a new term the cosmological constant into the field equations in order to allow the theory to predict a static universe. The modified field equations predicted a static universe of closed curvature in accordance with Einsteins understanding of Machs principle in these years. This model became known as the Einstein World or Einsteins static universe . 256 257 Following the discovery of the recession of the galaxies by Edwin Hubble in 1929 Einstein abandoned his static model of the universe and proposed two dynamic models of the cosmos the FriedmannEinstein universe of 1931 258 259 and the Einsteinde Sitter universe of 1932. 260 261 In each of these models Einstein discarded the cosmological constant claiming that it was in any case theoretically unsatisfactory . 258 259 262 In many Einstein biographies it is claimed that Einstein referred to the cosmological constant in later years as his biggest blunder based on a letter George Gamow claimed to have received from him. The astrophysicist Mario Livio has cast doubt on this claim. 263 In late 2013 a team led by the Irish physicist Cormac ORaifeartaigh discovered evidence that shortly after learning of Hubbles observations of the recession of the galaxies Einstein considered a steady-state model of the universe. 264 265 In a hitherto overlooked manuscript apparently written in early 1931 Einstein explored a model of the expanding universe in which the density of matter remains constant due to a continuous creation of matter a process that he associated with the cosmological constant. 266 267 As he stated in the paper In what follows I would like to draw attention to a solution to equation 1 that can account for Hubbels sic facts and in which the density is constant over time ... If one considers a physically bounded volume particles of matter will be continually leaving it. For the density to remain constant new particles of matter must be continually formed in the volume from space. It thus appears that Einstein considered a steady-state model of the expanding universe many years before Hoyle Bondi and Gold. 268 269 However Einsteins steady-state model contained a fundamental flaw and he quickly abandoned the idea. 266 267 270 Energy momentum pseudotensor Main article: Stressenergymomentum pseudotensor General relativity includes a dynamical spacetime so it is difficult to see how to identify the conserved energy and momentum. Noethers theorem allows these quantities to be determined from a Lagrangian with translation invariance but general covariance makes translation invariance into something of a gauge symmetry . The energy and momentum derived within general relativity by Noether s prescriptions do not make a real tensor for this reason. 271 Einstein argued that this is true for a fundamental reason: the gravitational field could be made to vanish by a choice of coordinates. He maintained that the non-covariant energy momentum pseudotensor was in fact the best description of the energy momentum distribution in a gravitational field. While the use of non-covariant objects like pseudotensors was criticized by Erwin Schrodinger and others Einsteins approach has been echoed by physicists including Lev Landau and Evgeny Lifshitz . 272 Wormholes In 1935 Einstein collaborated with Nathan Rosen to produce a model of a wormhole often called EinsteinRosen bridges . 273 274 His motivation was to model elementary particles with charge as a solution of gravitational field equations in line with the program outlined in the paper Do Gravitational Fields play an Important Role in the Constitution of the Elementary Particles? . These solutions cut and pasted Schwarzschild black holes to make a bridge between two patches. Because these solutions included spacetime curvature without the presence of a physical body Einstein and Rosen suggested that they could provide the beginnings of a theory that avoided the notion of point particles. However it was later found that EinsteinRosen bridges are not stable. 275 EinsteinCartan theory Main article: EinsteinCartan theory Einstein at his office University of Berlin 1920 In order to incorporate spinning point particles into general relativity the affine connection needed to be generalized to include an antisymmetric part called the torsion . This modification was made by Einstein and Cartan in the 1920s. Equations of motion Main article: EinsteinInfeldHoffmann equations In general relativity gravitational force is reimagined as curvature of spacetime . A curved path like an orbit is not the result of a force deflecting a body from an ideal straight-line path but rather the bodys attempt to fall freely through a background that is itself curved by the presence of other masses. A remark by John Archibald Wheeler that has become proverbial among physicists summarizes the theory: Spacetime tells matter how to move; matter tells spacetime how to curve. 276 277 The Einstein field equations cover the latter aspect of the theory relating the curvature of spacetime to the distribution of matter and energy. The geodesic equation covers the former aspect stating that freely falling bodies follow lines that are as straight as possible in a curved spacetime . Einstein regarded this as an independent fundamental assumption that had to be postulated in addition to the field equations in order to complete the theory. Believing this to be a shortcoming in how general relativity was originally presented he wished to derive it from the field equations themselves. Since the equations of general relativity are non-linear a lump of energy made out of pure gravitational fields like a black hole would move on a trajectory which is determined by the Einstein field equations themselves not by a new law. Accordingly Einstein proposed that the field equations would determine the path of a singular solution like a black hole to be a geodesic. Both physicists and philosophers have often repeated the assertion that the geodesic equation can be obtained from applying the field equations to the motion of a gravitational singularity but this claim remains disputed. 278 279 Old quantum theory Main article: Old quantum theory Photons and energy quanta The photoelectric effect. Incoming photons on the left strike a metal plate bottom and eject electrons depicted as flying off to the right. In a 1905 paper 227 Einstein postulated that light itself consists of localized particles quanta . Einsteins light quanta were nearly universally rejected by all physicists including Max Planck and Niels Bohr. This idea only became universally accepted in 1919 with Robert Millikan s detailed experiments on the photoelectric effect and with the measurement of Compton scattering . Einstein concluded that each wave of frequency f is associated with a collection of photons with energy hf each where h is the Planck constant . He did not say much more because he was not sure how the particles were related to the wave. But he did suggest that this idea would explain certain experimental results notably the photoelectric effect . 227 Light quanta were dubbed photons by Gilbert N. Lewis in 1926. 280 Quantized atomic vibrations Main article: Einstein solid In 1907 Einstein proposed a model of matter where each atom in a lattice structure is an independent harmonic oscillator. In the Einstein model each atom oscillates independentlya series of equally spaced quantized states for each oscillator. Einstein was aware that getting the frequency of the actual oscillations would be difficult but he nevertheless proposed this theory because it was a particularly clear demonstration that quantum mechanics could solve the specific heat problem in classical mechanics. Peter Debye refined this model. 281 BoseEinstein statistics Main article: BoseEinstein statistics In 1924 Einstein received a description of a statistical model from Indian physicist Satyendra Nath Bose based on a counting method that assumed that light could be understood as a gas of indistinguishable particles. Einstein noted that Boses statistics applied to some atoms as well as to the proposed light particles and submitted his translation of Boses paper to the Zeitschrift fur Physik . Einstein also published his own articles describing the model and its implications among them the BoseEinstein condensate phenomenon that some particulates should appear at very low temperatures. 282 It was not until 1995 that the first such condensate was produced experimentally by Eric Allin Cornell and Carl Wieman using ultra-cooling equipment built at the NIST JILA laboratory at the University of Colorado at Boulder . 283 BoseEinstein statistics are now used to describe the behaviors of any assembly of bosons . Einsteins sketches for this project may be seen in the Einstein Archive in the library of the Leiden University. 223 Waveparticle duality Einstein in 1921 photo by Harris Ewing Studio Although the patent office promoted Einstein to Technical Examiner Second Class in 1906 he had not given up on academia. In 1908 he became a Privatdozent at the University of Bern. 284 In Uber die Entwicklung unserer Anschauungen uber das Wesen und die Konstitution der Strahlung The Development of our Views on the Composition and Essence of Radiation on the quantization of light and in an earlier 1909 paper Einstein showed that Max Plancks energy quanta must have well-defined momenta and act in some respects as independent point-like particles . This paper introduced the photon concept and inspired the notion of waveparticle duality in quantum mechanics. Einstein saw this waveparticle duality in radiation as concrete evidence for his conviction that physics needed a new unified foundation. Zero-point energy In a series of works completed from 1911 to 1913 Planck reformulated his 1900 quantum theory and introduced the idea of zero-point energy in his second quantum theory . Soon this idea attracted the attention of Einstein and his assistant Otto Stern . Assuming the energy of rotating diatomic molecules contains zero-point energy they then compared the theoretical specific heat of hydrogen gas with the experimental data. The numbers matched nicely. However after publishing the findings they promptly withdrew their support because they no longer had confidence in the correctness of the idea of zero-point energy. 285 Stimulated emission In 1917 at the height of his work on relativity Einstein published an article in Physikalische Zeitschrift that proposed the possibility of stimulated emission the physical process that makes possible the maser and the laser . 286 This article showed that the statistics of absorption and emission of light would only be consistent with Plancks distribution law if the emission of light into a mode with n photons would be enhanced statistically compared to the emission of light into an empty mode. This paper was enormously influential in the later development of quantum mechanics because it was the first paper to show that the statistics of atomic transitions had simple laws. 287 Matter waves Einstein discovered Louis de Broglie s work and supported his ideas which were received skeptically at first. In another major paper from this era Einstein observed that de Broglie waves could explain the quantization rules of Bohr and Sommerfeld . This paper would inspire Schrodingers work of 1926. 288 289 Quantum mechanics Einsteins objections to quantum mechanics Newspaper headline on 4 May 1935 Einstein played a major role in developing quantum theory beginning with his 1905 paper on the photoelectric effect. However he became displeased with modern quantum mechanics as it had evolved after 1925 despite its acceptance by other physicists. He was skeptical that the randomness of quantum mechanics was fundamental rather than the result of determinism stating that God is not playing at dice . 290 Until the end of his life he continued to maintain that quantum mechanics was incomplete. 291 Bohr versus Einstein Main article: BohrEinstein debates Einstein and Niels Bohr 1925 The BohrEinstein debates were a series of public disputes about quantum mechanics between Einstein and Niels Bohr who were two of its founders. Their debates are remembered because of their importance to the philosophy of science . 292 293 294 Their debates would influence later interpretations of quantum mechanics . EinsteinPodolskyRosen paradox Main article: EPR paradox Einstein never fully accepted quantum mechanics. While he recognized that it made correct predictions he believed a more fundamental description of nature must be possible. Over the years he presented multiple arguments to this effect but the one he preferred most dated to a debate with Bohr in 1930. Einstein suggested a thought experiment in which two objects are allowed to interact and then moved apart a great distance from each other. The quantum-mechanical description of the two objects is a mathematical entity known as a wavefunction . If the wavefunction that describes the two objects before their interaction is given then the Schrodinger equation provides the wavefunction that describes them after their interaction. But because of what would later be called quantum entanglement measuring one object would lead to an instantaneous change of the wavefunction describing the other object no matter how far away it is. Moreover the choice of which measurement to perform upon the first object would affect what wavefunction could result for the second object. Einstein reasoned that no influence could propagate from the first object to the second instantaneously fast. Indeed he argued physics depends on being able to tell one thing apart from another and such instantaneous influences would call that into question. Because the true physical condition of the second object could not be immediately altered by an action done to the first Einstein concluded the wavefunction could not be that true physical condition only an incomplete description of it. 295 296 A more famous version of this argument came in 1935 when Einstein published a paper with Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen that laid out what would become known as the EPR paradox . 297 In this thought experiment two particles interact in such a way that the wavefunction describing them is entangled. Then no matter how far the two particles were separated a precise position measurement on one particle would imply the ability to predict perfectly the result of measuring the position of the other particle. Likewise a precise momentum measurement of one particle would result in an equally precise prediction for of the momentum of the other particle without needing to disturb the other particle in any way. They argued that no action taken on the first particle could instantaneously affect the other since this would involve information being transmitted faster than light which is forbidden by the theory of relativity . They invoked a principle later known as the EPR criterion of reality positing that: If without in any way disturbing a system we can predict with certainty i.e. with probability equal to unity the value of a physical quantity then there exists an element of reality corresponding to that quantity. From this they inferred that the second particle must have a definite value of both position and of momentum prior to either quantity being measured. But quantum mechanics considers these two observables incompatible and thus does not associate simultaneous values for both to any system. Einstein Podolsky and Rosen therefore concluded that quantum theory does not provide a complete description of reality. 298 In 1964 John Stewart Bell carried the analysis of quantum entanglement much further. He deduced that if measurements are performed independently on the two separated particles of an entangled pair then the assumption that the outcomes depend upon hidden variables within each half implies a mathematical constraint on how the outcomes on the two measurements are correlated. This constraint would later be called a Bell inequality . Bell then showed that quantum physics predicts correlations that violate this inequality. Consequently the only way that hidden variables could explain the predictions of quantum physics is if they are nonlocal which is to say that somehow the two particles are able to interact instantaneously no matter how widely they ever become separated. 299 300 Bell argued that because an explanation of quantum phenomena in terms of hidden variables would require nonlocality the EPR paradox is resolved in the way which Einstein would have liked least . 301 Despite this and although Einstein personally found the argument in the EPR paper overly complicated 295 296 that paper became among the most influential papers published in Physical Review . It is considered a centerpiece of the development of quantum information theory . 302 Unified field theory Main article: Classical unified field theories Encouraged by his success with general relativity Einstein sought an even more ambitious geometrical theory that would treat gravitation and electromagnetism as aspects of a single entity. In 1950 he described his unified field theory in a Scientific American article titled On the Generalized Theory of Gravitation . 303 His attempt to find the most fundamental laws of nature won him praise but not success: a particularly conspicuous blemish of his model was that it did not accommodate the strong and weak nuclear forces neither of which was well understood until many years after his death. Although most researchers now believe that Einsteins approach to unifying physics was mistaken his goal of a theory of everything is one to which his successors still aspire. 304 Other investigations Main article: Einsteins unsuccessful investigations Einstein conducted other investigations that were unsuccessful and abandoned. These pertain to force superconductivity and other research. Collaboration with other scientists The 1927 Solvay Conference in Brussels a gathering of the worlds top physicists. Einstein is in the center. In addition to longtime collaborators Leopold Infeld Nathan Rosen Peter Bergmann and others Einstein also had some one-shot collaborations with various scientists. Einsteinde Haas experiment Main article: Einsteinde Haas effect In 1908 Owen Willans Richardson predicted that a change in the magnetic moment of a free body will cause this body to rotate. This effect is a consequence of the conservation of angular momentum and is strong enough to be observable in ferromagnetic materials . 305 Einstein and Wander Johannes de Haas published two papers in 1915 claiming the first experimental observation of the effect. 306 307 Measurements of this kind demonstrate that the phenomenon of magnetization is caused by the alignment polarization of the angular momenta of the electrons in the material along the axis of magnetization. These measurements also allow the separation of the two contributions to the magnetization: that which is associated with the spin and with the orbital motion of the electrons. The Einstein-de Haas experiment is the only experiment concived realized and published by Albert Einstein himself. A complete original version of the Einstein-de Haas experimental equipment was donated by Geertruida de Haas-Lorentz wife of de Haas and daughter of Lorentz to the Ampere Museum in Lyon France in 1961 where it is currently on display. It was lost among the museums holdings and was rediscovered in 2023. 308 309 Einstein as an inventor In 1926 Einstein and his former student Leo Szilard co-invented and in 1930 patented the Einstein refrigerator . This absorption refrigerator was then revolutionary for having no moving parts and using only heat as an input. 310 On 11 November 1930 U.S. patent 1 781 541 was awarded to Einstein and Leo Szilard for the refrigerator. Their invention was not immediately put into commercial production but the most promising of their patents were acquired by the Swedish company Electrolux . note 6 Einstein also invented an electromagnetic pump 312 sound reproduction device 313 and several other household devices. 314 Non-scientific legacy Left-right: Heinrich Goldschmidt Einstein Ole Colbjrnsen Jrgen Vogt and Ilse Einstein at a picnic in Oslo in 1920. While traveling Einstein wrote daily to his wife Elsa and adopted stepdaughters Margot and Ilse. The letters were included in the papers bequeathed to the Hebrew University of Jerusalem . Margot Einstein permitted the personal letters to be made available to the public but requested that it not be done until twenty years after her death she died in 1986 315 . Barbara Wolff of the Hebrew Universitys Albert Einstein Archives told the BBC that there are about 3 500 pages of private correspondence written between 1912 and 1955. 316 Einsteins right of publicity was litigated in 2015 in a federal district court in California. Although the court initially held that the right had expired 317 that ruling was immediately appealed and the decision was later vacated in its entirety. The underlying claims between the parties in that lawsuit were ultimately settled. The right is enforceable and the Hebrew University of Jerusalem is the exclusive representative of that right. 318 Corbis successor to The Roger Richman Agency licenses the use of his name and associated imagery as agent for the university. 319 Mount Einstein in the Chugach Mountains of Alaska was named in 1955. Mount Einstein in New Zealands Paparoa Range was named after him in 1970 by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research . 320 In popular culture Main article: Albert Einstein in popular culture The famous image of Einstein taken by International News photographer Arthur Sasse in 1951 Einstein became one of the most famous scientific celebrities after the confirmation of his general theory of relativity in 1919. 321 322 323 Although most of the public had little understanding of his work he was widely recognized and admired. In the period before World War II The New Yorker published a vignette in their The Talk of the Town feature saying that Einstein was so well known in America that he would be stopped on the street by people wanting him to explain that theory . Eventually he came to cope with unwanted enquirers by pretending to be someone else: Pardon me sorry! Always I am mistaken for Professor Einstein. 324 Einstein has been the subject of or inspiration for many novels films plays and works of music. 325 He is a favorite model for depictions of absent-minded professors ; his expressive face and distinctive hairstyle have been widely copied and exaggerated. Time magazines Frederic Golden wrote that Einstein was a cartoonists dream come true . 326 Many popular quotations are often misattributed to him. 327 328 Awards and honors Main article: List of awards and honors received by Albert Einstein Einstein received numerous awards and honors and in 1922 he was awarded the 1921 Nobel Prize in Physics for his services to Theoretical Physics and especially for his discovery of the law of the photoelectric effect . None of the nominations in 1921 met the criteria set by Alfred Nobel so the 1921 prize was carried forward and awarded to Einstein in 1922. 8 Einsteinium a synthetic chemical element was named in his honor in 1955 a few months after his death. 329 Publications Scientific Further information: List of scientific publications by Albert Einstein Einstein Albert 1901 Completed 13 December 1900 and manuscript received 16 December 1900. Written at Zurich Switzerland. Paul Karl Ludwig Drude ed.. Folgerungen aus den Capillaritatserscheinungen Conclusions Drawn from the Phenomena of Capillarity. Annalen der Physik . Vierte Folge in German. 4 all series: 309 3. Leipzig Germany: Verlag von Johann Ambrosius Barth published 1 March 1901: 513523. Bibcode : 1901AnP...309..513E . doi : 10.1002andp.19013090306 via Wiley Online Library Hoboken New Jersey US March 2006. Einstein Albert 1905a Completed 17 March 1905 and submitted 18 March 1905. Written at Berne Switzerland. Paul Karl Ludwig Drude ed.. Uber einen die Erzeugung und Verwandlung des Lichtes betreffenden heuristischen Gesichtspunkt On a Heuristic Viewpoint Concerning the Production and Transformation of Light PDF . Annalen der Physik . Vierte Folge in German. 17 all series: 322 6. Leipzig Germany: Verlag von Johann Ambrosius Barth published 9 June 1905: 132148. Bibcode : 1905AnP...322..132E . doi : 10.1002andp.19053220607 via Wiley Online Library Hoboken New Jersey US 10 March 2006. Einstein Albert 1905b Completed 30 April 1905. Eine neue Bestimmung der Molekuldimensionen A new determination of molecular dimensions PDF . Dissertationen Universitat Zurich PhD Thesis in German. Berne Switzerland: Wyss Buchdruckerei published 20 July 1905. doi : 10.3929ethz-a-000565688 . hdl : 20.500.11850139872 via ETH Bibliothek Zurich 2008. Einstein Albert 1905c Manuscript received: 11 May 1905. Written at Berne Switzerland. Paul Karl Ludwig Drude ed.. Uber die von der molekularkinetischen Theorie der Warme geforderte Bewegung von in ruhenden Flussigkeiten suspendierten Teilchen On the Motion Required by the Molecular Kinetic Theory of Heat of Small Particles Suspended in a Stationary Liquid. Annalen der Physik . Vierte Folge in German. 17 all series: 322 8. Leipzig Germany: Verlag von Johann Ambrosius Barth published 18 July 1905: 549560. Bibcode : 1905AnP...322..549E . doi : 10.1002andp.19053220806 . hdl : 109152785 via Wiley Online Library Hoboken New Jersey US 10 March 2006. Einstein Albert 1905d Manuscript received 30 June 1905. Written at Berne Switzerland. Paul Karl Ludwig Drude ed.. Zur Elektrodynamik bewegter Korper On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies. Annalen der Physik Submitted manuscript. Vierte Folge in German. 17 all series: 322 10. Leipzig Germany: Verlag von Johann Ambrosius Barth published 26 September 1905: 891921. Bibcode : 1905AnP...322..891E . doi : 10.1002andp.19053221004 . hdl : 109152786 via Wiley Online Library Hoboken New Jersey US 10 March 2006. Einstein Albert 1905e Manuscript received 27 September 1905. Written at Berne Switzerland. Paul Karl Ludwig Drude ed.. Ist die Tragheit eines Korpers von seinem Energieinhalt abhangig? Does the Inertia of a Body Depend Upon Its Energy Content?. Annalen der Physik . Vierte Folge in German. 18 all series: 323 13. Leipzig Germany: Verlag von Johann Ambrosius Barth published 21 November 1905: 639641. Bibcode : 1905AnP...323..639E . doi : 10.1002andp.19053231314 via Wiley Online Library Hoboken New Jersey US 10 March 2006. Einstein Albert 1915 Completed 25 November 1915. Die Feldgleichungen der Gravitation The Field Equations of Gravitation Online page images . Sitzungsberichte 1915 in German. Berlin Germany: Koniglich Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften published 2 December 1915: 844847 via ECHO Cultural Heritage Online Max Planck Institute for the History of Science. Einstein Albert 1916 Issued 29 June 1916. Naherungsweise Integration der Feldgleichungen der Gravitation Approximate integration of the field equations of gravitation Online page images . Sitzungsberichte 1916 . Berlin Germany: Koniglich Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften : 688696. Bibcode : 1916SPAW.......688E . Retrieved 24 January 2022 via SAONASA Astrophysics Data System ADS. Einstein Albert 1917a. Kosmologische Betrachtungen zur allgemeinen Relativitatstheorie Cosmological Considerations in the General Theory of Relativity Online page images . Sitzungsberichte 1917 in German. Koniglich Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften Berlin. Einstein Albert 1917b. Zur Quantentheorie der Strahlung On the Quantum Mechanics of Radiation. Physikalische Zeitschrift in German. 18 : 121128. Bibcode : 1917PhyZ...18..121E . Einstein Albert 31 January 1918. Uber Gravitationswellen About gravitational waves. Sitzungsberichte der Koniglich Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften Berlin : 154167. Bibcode : 1918SPAW.......154E . Retrieved 14 November 2020 . Einstein Albert 1923 First published 1923 in English 1967. Written at Gothenburg. Grundgedanken und Probleme der Relativitatstheorie Fundamental Ideas and Problems of the Theory of Relativity Speech. Lecture delivered to the Nordic Assembly of Naturalists at Gothenburg 11 July 1923. Nobel Lectures Physics 19011921 in German and English. Stockholm: Nobelprice.org published 3 February 2015 via Nobel Media AB 2014. Einstein Albert 1924 Published 10 July 1924. Quantentheorie des einatomigen idealen Gases Quantum theory of monatomic ideal gases. Sitzungsberichte der Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften Physikalisch-Mathematische Klasse in German: 261267. Archived from the original Online page images on 14 October 2016 . Retrieved 26 February 2015 via ECHO Cultural Heritage Online Max Planck Institute for the History of Science. First of a series of papers on this topic. Einstein Albert 12 March 1926 Cover Date 1 March 1926. Written at Berlin. Die Ursache der Maanderbildung der Flulaufe und des sogenannten Baerschen Gesetzes On Baers law and meanders in the courses of rivers. Die Naturwissenschaften in German. 14 11. Heidelberg Germany: 223224. Bibcode : 1926NW.....14..223E . doi : 10.1007BF01510300 . ISSN 1432-1904 . S2CID 39899416 . Einstein Albert 1926b. Written at Berne Switzerland. Furth R. ed.. Investigations on the Theory of the Brownian Movement PDF . Translated by Cowper A. D. US: Dover Publications published 1956. ISBN 978-1-60796-285-4 . Retrieved 4 January 2015 . Einstein Albert 1931. Zum kosmologischen Problem der allgemeinen Relativitatstheorie On the cosmological problem of the general theory of relativity. Sonderasugabe aus den Sitzungsb. Konig. Preuss. Akad. : 235237. Einstein A.; de Sitter W. 1932. On the relation between the expansion and the mean density of the universe . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences . 18 3: 213214. Bibcode : 1932PNAS...18..213E . doi : 10.1073pnas.18.3.213 . PMC 1076193 . PMID 16587663 . Einstein Albert; Rosen Nathan 1935. The Particle Problem in the General Theory of Relativity . Physical Review . 48 1: 73. Bibcode : 1935PhRv...48...73E . doi : 10.1103PhysRev.48.73 . Einstein Albert; Podolsky Boris; Rosen Nathan 15 May 1935 Received 25 March 1935. Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical Reality Be Considered Complete? . Physical Review Submitted manuscript. 47 10: 777780. Bibcode : 1935PhRv...47..777E . doi : 10.1103PhysRev.47.777 via APS Journals. Einstein Albert 1950. On the Generalized Theory of Gravitation . Scientific American . CLXXXII 4: 1317. Bibcode : 1950SciAm.182d..13E . doi : 10.1038scientificamerican0450-13 . Einstein Albert 1954. Ideas and Opinions . New York: Crown Publishers. ISBN 978-0-517-00393-0 . 1995 1954. Ideas and Opinions . New York: Three Rivers Press. ISBN 978-0-517-88440-9 . Einstein Albert 1969. Albert Einstein Hedwig und Max Born: Briefwechsel 19161955 in German. Commented by Max Born; Preface by Bertrand Russell; Foreword by Werner Heisenberg. Munich: Nymphenburger Verlagshandlung. ISBN 978-3-88682-005-4 . A reprint of this book was published by Edition Erbrich in 1982 ISBN 978-3-88682-005-4 . Stachel John ; Martin J. Klein; A. J. Kox; Michel Janssen; R. Schulmann; Diana Komos Buchwald; et al. eds. 21 July 2008 Published between 1987 and 2006. The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein . Vol. 110. Princeton University Press . Further information about the volumes published so far can be found on the webpages of the Einstein Papers Project 330 and on the Princeton University Press Einstein Page. 331 Others Einstein Albert; et al. 4 December 1948. To the editors of The New York Times . The New York Times . Melville New York. ISBN 978-0-7354-0359-8 . Archived from the original on 17 December 2007 . Retrieved 25 May 2006 . Einstein Albert May 1949. Sweezy Paul; Huberman Leo eds.. Why Socialism? . Monthly Review . 1 1: 915. doi : 10.14452MR-001-01-1949-053 . May 2009 May 1949. Why Socialism? Reprise . Monthly Review . New York: Monthly Review Foundation. Archived from the original on 11 January 2006 . Retrieved 16 January 2006 via MonthlyReview.org. Einstein Albert September 1960. Foreword to Gandhi Wields the Weapon of Moral Power: Three Case Histories . Introduction by Bharatan Kumarappa. Ahmedabad: Navajivan Publishing House. pp. vvi. OCLC 2325889 . Foreword originally written in April 1953. Einstein Albert 1979. Autobiographical Notes . Paul Arthur Schilpp Centennial ed.. Chicago: Open Court. ISBN 978-0-87548-352-8 . The chasing a light beam thought experiment is described on pages 4851. See also Bern Historical Museum Einstein Museum Einstein notation Frist Campus Center at Princeton University room 302 is associated with Einstein. The center was once the Palmer Physical Laboratory. Heinrich Burkhardt Heinrich Zangger History of gravitational theory List of coupled cousins List of German inventors and discoverers List of Jewish Nobel laureates List of peace activists Relativity priority dispute Sticky bead argument Notes a b c d e Until 1913 German citizenship was acquired through citizenship in a constituent state whose requirements varied; from 1913 uniform citizenship requirements were set at the national level . Einsteins scores on his Matura certificate: German 5; French 3; Italian 5; History 6; Geography 4; Algebra 6; Geometry 6; Descriptive Geometry 6; Physics 6; Chemistry 5; Natural History 5; Art Drawing 4; Technical Drawing 4. Scale : 6 very good 5 good 4 sufficient 3 insufficient 2 poor 1 very poor. Their leaders in Germany have not driven out her cut-throats and her blackguards. She has chosen the cream of her culture and has suppressed it. She has even turned upon her most glorious citizen Albert Einstein who is the supreme example of the selfless intellectual...The man who beyond all others approximates a citizen of the world is without a home. How proud we must be to offer him temporary shelter. In his paper Einstein wrote: The introduction of a luminiferous ther will be proved to be superfluous in so far as according to the conceptions which will be developed we shall introduce neither a space absolutely at rest endowed with special properties nor shall we associate a velocity-vector with a point in which electro-magnetic processes take place. For a discussion of the reception of relativity theory around the world and the different controversies it encountered see the articles in Glick 1987 . In September 2008 it was reported that Malcolm McCulloch of Oxford University was heading a three-year project to develop more robust appliances that could be used in locales lacking electricity and that his team had completed a prototype Einstein refrigerator. He was quoted as saying that improving the design and changing the types of gases used might allow the designs efficiency to be quadrupled. 311 References a b c d Whittaker E. 1 November 1955. Albert Einstein. 18791955 . Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society . 1 : 3767. doi : 10.1098rsbm.1955.0005 . JSTOR 769242 . The Gold Medal PDF . Royal Astronomical Society . Archived PDF from the original on 20 December 2021 . Retrieved 20 December 2021 . Membership directory . National Academy of Sciences . Archived from the original on 20 December 2021 . Retrieved 20 December 2021 . a b c Robinson Andrew 2024. Einstein in Oxford . Bodleian Library Publishing . ISBN 978-1-85124-638-0 . Wells John 3 April 2008. Longman Pronunciation Dictionary 3rd ed.. Pearson Longman. ISBN 978-1-4058-8118-0 . Yang Fujia; Hamilton Joseph H. 2010. Modern Atomic and Nuclear Physics . World Scientific. p. 274. ISBN 978-981-4277-16-7 . Bodanis David 2000. E mc 2 : A Biography of the Worlds Most Famous Equation . New York: Walker. a b c The Nobel Prize in Physics 1921 . Nobel Prize. Archived from the original on 3 July 2018 . Retrieved 11 July 2016 . Levenson Thomas 9 June 2017. The Scientist and the Fascist . The Atlantic . Archived from the original on 12 May 2019 . Retrieved 23 August 2018 . Paul S. Boyer; Melvyn Dubofsky 2001. The Oxford Companion to United States History . Oxford University Press. p. 218 . ISBN 978-0-19-508209-8 . Albert Einstein on nuclear weapons Wise International . wiseinternational.org . Retrieved 23 October 2022 . Howard Don A. ed. 2014 First published 11 February 2004. Einsteins Philosophy of Science . Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . The Metaphysics Research Lab Center for the Study of Language and Information CSLI Stanford University. Archived from the original on 13 April 2021 . Retrieved 4 February 2015 . Howard Don A. December 2005. Albert Einstein as a Philosopher of Science PDF . Physics Today . 58 12: 3440. Bibcode : 2005PhT....58l..34H . doi : 10.10631.2169442 . S2CID 170769196 . Archived PDF from the original on 28 August 2015 . Retrieved 8 March 2015 via University of Notre Dame Notre Dame IN authors personal webpage. a b Galison 2000 p. 377. a b Scientific Background on the Nobel Prize in Physics 2011. The accelerating universe PDF . Nobel Media AB. p. 2. Archived from the original PDF on 16 May 2012 . Retrieved 4 January 2015 . Overbye Dennis 24 November 2015. A Century Ago Einsteins Theory of Relativity Changed Everything . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 1 January 2022 . Retrieved 24 November 2015 . Robinson Andrew 30 April 2018. Did Einstein really say that? . Nature . 557 30: 30. Bibcode : 2018Natur.557...30R . doi : 10.1038d41586-018-05004-4 . ISSN 0028-0836 . S2CID 14013938 . Archived from the original on 9 November 2020 . Retrieved 21 February 2021 . Result of WordNet Search for Einstein . 3.1. The Trustees of Princeton University. Archived from the original on 28 August 2015 . Retrieved 4 January 2015 . Albert Einstein . Time . 31 December 1999. Physics: past present future . Physics World . 6 December 1999 . Retrieved 1 August 2023 . a b c Albert Einstein Biography . Nobel Foundation . Archived from the original on 6 March 2007 . Retrieved 7 March 2007 . Albert Einstein 18791955 . Jewisth Virtual Library. Archived from the original on 9 March 2017 . Retrieved 13 February 2021 . Isaacson Walter 2009. How Einstein Divided Americas Jews . The Atlantic . Archived from the original on 26 January 2021 . Retrieved 13 February 2021 . Walter Isaacson 2007. Einstein: His Life and Universe . p. 13. Stachel 2002 pp. 5961 . Barry R. Parker 2003. Einstein: The Passions of a Scientist Prometheus Books p. 31 University of Pavia. Einstein Albert . Museo per la Storia dellUniversita di Pavia . University of Pavia . Retrieved 7 January 2023 . Folsing 1997 pp. 3031. Stachel et al. 2008 vol. 1 1987 doc. 5. Mehra Jagdish 2001. Albert Einsteins First Paper . Golden Age Of Theoretical Physics The Boxed Set Of 2 Vols . World Scientific. ISBN 978-981-4492-85-0 . Retrieved 5 January 2021 . The Three-body Problem from Pythagoras to Hawking Mauri Valtonen Joanna Anosova Konstantin Kholshevnikov Aleksandr Myllari Victor Orlov Kiyotaka Tanikawa Springer 2016 p. 43 Simon and Schuster 2008 a b Isaacson 2007 p. 16. Bloom Howard 2012. The God Problem: How a Godless Cosmos Creates illustrated ed.. Prometheus Books. p. 294. ISBN 978-1-61614-552-1 . Retrieved 8 August 2020 . Bloom Howard 30 August 2012. Extract of page 294 . Prometheus Books. ISBN 978-1-61614-552-1 . Retrieved 8 August 2020 . a b c Isaacson 2007 p. 17. Calaprice Lipscombe 2005 p. 8. Stachel et al. 2008 vol. 1 1987 p. 11. Folsing 1997 pp. 3637. Hunziker Herbert 2015. Albert Einsteins Magic Mountain: An Aarau Education . Physics in Perspective . 17 1: 5569. Bibcode : 2015PhP....17...55H . doi : 10.1007s00016-014-0153-5 . ISSN 1422-6944 . ref for: Old Cantonal School Aarau a b Highfield Carter 1993 pp. 21 31 5657. Folsing 1997 p. 40. Stachel et al. 2008 vol. 1 1987 docs. 2127. a b c Gagnon Pauline 19 December 2016. The Forgotten Life of Einsteins First Wife . Scientific American Blog Network . Archived from the original on 17 October 2020 . Retrieved 17 October 2020 . Troemel-Ploetz D. 1990. Mileva Einstein-Maric: The Woman Who Did Einsteins Mathematics . Womens Studies International Forum . 13 5: 415432. doi : 10.10160277-53959090094-e . Walker Evan Harris February 1989. Did Einstein Espouse his Spouses Ideas? PDF . Physics Today . 42 2: 913. Bibcode : 1989PhT....42b...9W . doi : 10.10631.2810898 . Archived from the original PDF on 19 January 2012 . Retrieved 19 October 2014 . Pais 1994 pp. 129. Holton G. Einstein History and Other Passions Harvard University Press 1996 pp. 177193. Stachel 2002 pp. 4956 . Martinez A. A. Handling evidence in history: the case of Einsteins wife School Science Review 86 316 March 2005 pp. 4956. PDF PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 11 August 2011 . Retrieved 11 August 2011 . Renn Jurgen; Schulmann Robert eds. 16 November 2000. Albert Einstein Mileva Maric: The Love Letters . Translated by Smith Shawn. Princeton University Press . pp. 7374 78. ISBN 978-0-691-08886-0 . Calaprice Lipscombe 2005 pp. 2223. Wuthrich Urs 11 April 2015. Die Liebesbriefe des untreuen Einstein The love letters of the unfaithful Einstein. BZ Berner Zeitung in German. Bern Switzerland. Archived from the original on 16 April 2015 . Retrieved 11 April 2015 . Ich denke in innigster Liebe an Dich in jeder freien Minute und bin so unglucklich wie nur ein Mensch es sein kann. Calaprice Lipscombe 2005 p. 50 . a b c d e Hoffmann Dieter 2013. Einsteins Berlin: In the footsteps of a genius . Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press. pp. 29 28. ISBN 978-1-4214-1040-1 . Stachel 1966 . Smith Dinitia 6 November 1996. Dark Side of Einstein Emerges in His Letters . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 5 January 2021 . Retrieved 17 August 2020 . Stachel 2002 p. 50 . Volume 9: The Berlin Years: Correspondence January 1919 April 1920 English translation supplement page 6 . einsteinpapers.press.princeton.edu . Archived from the original on 4 October 2021 . Retrieved 4 October 2021 . Isaacson 2007 Main characters front matter. Calaprice Kennefick Schulmann 2015 p. 62. Highfield Roger 10 July 2006. Einsteins theory of fidelity . The Daily Telegraph . Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Overbye Dennis 17 April 2017. Genius Unravels the Mysteries of Einsteins Universe . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 18 April 2017. Genius Albert Einsteins Theory of Infidelity . NatGeo TV. Archived from the original on 23 September 2020 . Retrieved 9 August 2020 . Getting up close and personal with Einstein . The Jerusalem Post JPost.com . Archived from the original on 23 September 2020 . Retrieved 29 August 2020 . Highfield Carter 1993 p. 216. Einstein secret love affairs out! . Hindustan Times . 13 July 2006. Archived from the original on 23 September 2020 . Retrieved 17 August 2020 . Graydon Samuel 14 November 2023. Einstein in Time and Space: A Life in 99 Particles 1 ed.. New York: Simon and Schuster. p. 199. ISBN 978-1-9821-8512-1 . New letters shed light on Einsteins love life . NBC News. 11 July 2006. Archived from the original on 22 February 2020 . Retrieved 15 August 2020 . Albert Einstein may have had the IQ but he needed to work on his EQ . The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 8 February 2021 . Retrieved 15 August 2020 . Pogrebin Robin 1 June 1998. Love Letters By Einstein at Auction . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 7 November 2020 . Retrieved 10 August 2020 . Einsteins letters show affair with spy . The Independent . 2 June 1998. Archived from the original on 16 November 2020 . Retrieved 10 November 2020 . Robinson Andrew 2015. Einstein: A Hundred Years of Relativity . Princeton University Press. pp. 143145. ISBN 978-0-691-16989-7 . Retrieved 19 July 2016 . Neffe 2007 p. 203 . Stachel et al. 2008 vol. 1 1987 doc. 67. Folsing 1997 p. 82. J. J. OConnor; E. F. Robertson May 2010. Grossmann biography . MacTutor . School of Mathematics and Statistics University of St Andrews Scotland. Archived from the original on 10 September 2015 . Retrieved 27 March 2015 . Isaacson 2007 p. 63. Einstein at the patent office official website. Berne Switzerland: Swiss Federal Institute of Intellectual Property IGEIPI. 6 February 2014. Archived from the original on 30 August 2016 . Retrieved 9 September 2016 . a b FAQ about Einstein and the Institute official website. Berne Switzerland: Swiss Federal Institute of Intellectual Property IGEIPI. 27 May 2014. Archived from the original on 12 June 2021 . Retrieved 27 March 2015 . Galison 2000 p. 370. Highfield Carter 1993 pp. 9698. Isaacson 2007 pp. 7984. a b Einstein 1901 . Murrell J. N.; Grobert N. January 2002. The centenary of Einsteins first scientific paper . Notes and Records of the Royal Society of London . 56 1: 8994. doi : 10.1098rsnr.2002.0169 . JSTOR 532124 . a b Einstein 1905b Meinem Freunde Herr Dr. Marcel Grossmann gewidmet Dedicated to my friend Dr. Marcel Grossmann . Einstein 1926b chap. A New Determination of Molecular Dimensions . Mehra Jagdish 28 February 2001. Golden Age Of Theoretical Physics The Boxed Set Of 2 Vols . World Scientific. ISBN 978-981-4492-85-0 . May Andrew 2017. Clegg Brian ed.. Albert Einstein in 30-Second Physics: The 50 most fundamental concepts in physics each explained in half a minute . London: Ivy Press. pp. 108109. ISBN 978-1-78240-514-6 . Associate Professor at the University of Zurich und professor in Prague 19091912 digital library. Einstein Online in German and English. Bern Switzerland: ETH-Bibliothek Zurich ETH Zurich www.ethz.ch. 2014. Archived from the original on 21 August 2014 . Retrieved 17 August 2014 . Isaacson 2007 p. 164. von Hirschhausen Ulrike 2007. Von imperialer Inklusion zur nationalen Exklusion:Staatsburgerschaft in Osterreich- Ungarn 18671923 PDF WZB Discussion Paper. ZKD Veroffentlichungsreihe der Forschungsgruppe Zivilgesellschaft Citizenship und politische Mobilisierung in Europa Schwerpunkt Zivilgesellschaft Konflikte und Demokratie Wissenschaftszentrum Berlin fur Sozialforschung. Berlin Germany: WZB Social Science Research Center Berlin. p. 8. ISSN 1860-4315 . Archived PDF from the original on 9 September 2015 . Retrieved 4 August 2015 . Eine weitere Diskontinuitat bestand viertens darin dass die Bestimmungen der osterreichischen Staatsburgerschaft die in den ersten Dritteln des Jahrhunderts auch auf Ungarn angewandt worden waren seit 1867 nur noch fur die cisleithanische Reichshalfte galten. Ungarn entwickelte hingegen jetzt eine eige-ne Staatsburgerschaft. Lyth David 31 January 2019. The Road to Einsteins Relativity: Following in the Footsteps of the Giants . CRC Press. ISBN 978-0-429-68268-1 . Professor at the ETH Zurich 19121914 digital library. Einstein Online in German and English. Zurich Switzerland: ETH-Bibliothek Zurich ETH Zurich www.ethz.ch. 2014. Archived from the original on 21 August 2014 . Retrieved 17 August 2014 . a b Stachel 2002 p. 534. a b Albert Einstein: His Influence on Physics Philosophy and Politics JL Heilbron 1982 Published by: American Association for the Advancement of Science via JSTOR . JSTOR 1687520 . Archived from the original on 22 November 2021 . Retrieved 22 November 2021 . Scheideler 2002 p. 333. Weinstein 2015 pp. 1819. Calaprice Lipscombe 2005 Timeline p. xix . Director in the attic . Max-Planck-Gesellschaft Munchen. Archived from the original on 31 January 2017 . Retrieved 9 July 2017 . Albert Einstein 18791955 . Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on 23 September 2015 . Retrieved 21 July 2015 . Albert Einstein . American Academy of Arts Sciences . 9 February 2023. Archived from the original on 21 February 2024 . Retrieved 13 July 2023 . APS Member History . search.amphilsoc.org . Retrieved 13 July 2023 . A New Physics Based on Einstein . The New York Times . 25 November 1919. p. 17. Archived from the original on 8 June 2019 . Retrieved 8 June 2019 . Weinberg Steven 1972. Gravitation and Cosmology: Principles and applications of the general theory of relativity . John Wiley Sons Inc. pp. 1920. ISBN 9788126517558 . Andrzej Stasiak 2003. Myths in science . EMBO Reports . 4 3: 236. doi : 10.1038sj.embor.embor779 . PMC 1315907 . Francis Matthew 3 March 2017. How Albert Einstein Used His Fame to Denounce American Racism . Smithsonian Magazine. Falk Dan One Hundred Years Ago Einstein Was Given a Heros Welcome by Americas Jews Archived 3 April 2021 at the Wayback Machine Smithsonian 2 April 2021 Hoffmann 1972 pp. 145148. Folsing 1997 pp. 499508. As Einstein Sees American . Archived from the original on 25 February 2020 . Retrieved 25 May 2014 . Einsteins World a 1931 reprint with minor changes of his 1921 essay. Holton 1984 p. 20. Isaacson 2007 pp. 307308. Flood Alison 12 June 2018. Einsteins travel diaries reveal shocking xenophobia . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 17 January 2019 . Retrieved 13 June 2018 . Katz Brigit. Einsteins Travel Diaries Reveal His Deeply Troubling Views on Race . Smithsonian Magazine . Archived from the original on 25 December 2020 . Retrieved 3 January 2021 . Isaacson 2007 p. 308. The Nobel Prize in Physics 1921: Albert Einstein. Banquet Speech by R. Nadolny in German . Archived from the original on 12 June 2017 . Retrieved 13 June 2017 . Retrieved 9 December 2015 via Nobelprize.org Montes-Santiago J. 16 July 2017. The meeting of Einstein with Cajal Madrid 1923: a lost tide of fortune . Revista de Neurologia . 43 2: 113117. ISSN 0210-0010 . PMID 16838259 . Grandjean Martin 2018. Les reseaux de la cooperation intellectuelle. La Societe des Nations comme actrice des echanges scientifiques et culturels dans lentre-deux-guerres The Networks of Intellectual Cooperation. The League of Nations as an Actor of the Scientific and Cultural Exchanges in the Inter-War Period in French. Lausanne: Universite de Lausanne. Archived from the original on 12 September 2018 . Retrieved 18 September 2018 . pp. 296302 Grandjean Martin 2017. Analisi e visualizzazioni delle reti in storia. Lesempio della cooperazione intellettuale della Societa delle Nazioni . Memoria e Ricerca 2: 371393. doi : 10.1464787204 . See also: Martin Grandjean 2017. French version . Memoria e Ricerca 2: 371393. doi : 10.1464787204 . Archived from the original on 7 November 2017 . Retrieved 1 December 2017 . PDF and English summary . Archived from the original on 2 November 2017 . Retrieved 1 December 2017 . . Shine Cormac 2018. Papal Diplomacy by Proxy? Catholic Internationalism at the League of Nations International Committee on Intellectual Cooperation . The Journal of Ecclesiastical History . 69 4: 785805. doi : 10.1017S0022046917002731 . The Committee on Intellectual Cooperation of the League of Nations . Science . 64 1649. American Association for the Advancement of Science: 132133. 6 August 1926. doi : 10.1126science.64.1649.132.b . JSTOR 1651869 . S2CID 239778182 . Retrieved 30 May 2022 . Tolmasquim Alfredo Tiomno 2012. Science and Ideology in Einsteins Visit to South America in 1925 . In Lehner Christoph; Renn Jurgen; Schemmel Matthias eds.. Einstein and the Changing Worldviews of Physics . pp. 117133. doi : 10.1007978-0-8176-4940-16 . ISBN 978-0-8176-4939-5 . Gangui Alejandro; Ortiz Eduardo L. 2008. Einsteins Unpublished Opening Lecture for His Course on Relativity Theory in Argentina 1925 . Science in Context . 21 3: 435450. arXiv : 0903.2064 . doi : 10.1017S0269889708001853 . S2CID 54920641 . Gangui Alejandro; Ortiz Eduardo L. 2016. The scientific impact of Einsteins visit to Argentina in 1925 . arXiv : 1603.03792 physics.hist-ph . Isaacson 2007 p. 368. a b c Isaacson 2007 p. 370. Isaacson 2007 p. 373. a b Isaacson 2007 p. 374. Chaplin 1964 p. 320. Chaplin 1964 p. 322. Folsing 1997 p. 659. Isaacson 2007 p. 404. Albert Einstein Quits Germany Renounces Citizenship . History Unfolded: US Newspapers and the Holocaust . Archived from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 14 March 2021 . a b c d e Isaacson 2007 pp. 407410. Richard Kroehling July 1991. Albert Einstein: How I See the World . American Masters . PBS. Archived from the original on 14 November 2011 . Retrieved 29 May 2018 . a b Robinson Andrew 2019. Einstein on the Run . Yale University Press . ISBN 978-0-300-23476-3 . Holton 1984 . a b Fred Jerome; Rodger Taylor 2006. Einstein on Race and Racism . Rutgers University Press. p. 10. ISBN 978-0-8135-3952-2 . Retrieved 18 June 2015 . Einstein 1954 p. 197. a b Keyte Suzanne 9 October 2013. 3 October 1933 Albert Einstein presents his final speech given in Europe at the Royal Albert Hall . Royal Albert Hall . Retrieved 20 June 2022 . Isaacson 2007 p. 422. Professor Einstein with Commander Locker-Lampson . Archived from the original on 6 September 2017 . Retrieved 2 June 2017 . ScienceMuseum.org UK Isaacson 2007 pp. 419420. a b Gilbert Martin. Churchill and the Jews Henry Holt and Company N.Y. 2007 pp. 101 176 Reisman Arnold 20 November 2006. What a Freshly Discovered Einstein Letter Says About Turkey Today . History News Network George Mason University. Archived from the original on 17 April 2014 . Retrieved 2 June 2014 . a b c d e Clark 1971 . Denunciation of German Policy is a Stirring Event Associated Press 27 July 1933 Stateless Jews: The Exiles from Germany Nationality Plan The Guardian UK 27 July 1933 Folsing 1997 pp. 649 678. a b Arntzenius Linda G. 2011. Institute for Advanced Study . Arcadia Publishing. p. 19. ISBN 978-0-7385-7409-7 . Retrieved 18 June 2015 . Oxford Jewish Personalities . Oxford Chabad Society. Archived from the original on 12 January 2016 . Retrieved 7 March 2015 . How Einstein fled from the Nazis to an Oxford college . The Oxford Times . 2012. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 7 March 2015 . Folsing 1997 pp. 686687. In Brief . Institute for Advanced Study. 10 September 2009. Archived from the original on 29 March 2010 . Retrieved 4 March 2010 . Weyl Hermann 2013. Pesic Peter ed.. Levels of Infinity: Selected Writings on Mathematics and Philosophy . Dover Publications. p. 5. ISBN 9780486266930 . Retrieved 30 May 2022 . By 1933 Weyl... left for the newly-founded Institute for Advanced Studies at Princeton where his colleagues included Einstein Kurt Godel and John von Neumann. Isaacson 2007 p. 630. Gosling F. G. 2010. The Manhattan Project: Making the Atomic Bomb . U.S. Department of Energy History Division. p. vii. Archived from the original on 13 June 2015 . Retrieved 7 June 2015 . Lanouette William; Silard Bela 1992. Genius in the Shadows: A Biography of Leo Szilard: The Man Behind The Bomb . New York: Charles Scribners Sons. pp. 198200 . ISBN 978-0-684-19011-2 . Diehl Sarah J.; Moltz James Clay 2008. Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation: A Reference Handbook . ABC-CLIO. p. 218. ISBN 978-1-59884-071-1 . Retrieved 7 June 2015 . Hewlett Richard G.; Anderson Oscar E. 1962. The New World 19391946 PDF . University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press. pp. 1516. ISBN 978-0-520-07186-5 . OCLC 637004643 . Archived PDF from the original on 26 September 2019 . Retrieved 7 June 2015 . Einstein Albert 1952. On My Participation in the Atom Bomb Project . Archived from the original on 28 August 2015 . Retrieved 7 June 2015 via atomicarchive.org. Clark 1971 p. 752. Einstein Albert; Russell Bertrand 9 July 1955. The Russell-Einstein Manifesto . London. Archived from the original on 1 March 2020 . Retrieved 9 June 2021 . cite book : CS1 maint: location missing publisher link Boyko Hugo. Science and the Future of Mankind PDF . Indiana University Press. p. 377. Isaacson 2007 p. 432. a b Francis Matthew 3 March 2017. How Albert Einstein Used His Fame to Denounce American Racism . Smithsonian Magazine . Archived from the original on 11 February 2021 . Retrieved 10 February 2021 . Calaprice 2005 pp. 148149. Robeson 2002 p. 565. a b Albert Einstein Civil Rights activist . 12 April 2007. Archived from the original on 2 March 2018 . Retrieved 8 June 2014 . Harvard Gazette 12 April 2007 Jerome Fred December 2004. Einstein Race and the Myth of the Cultural Icon . Isis . 95 4: 627639. Bibcode : 2004Isis...95..627J . doi : 10.1086430653 . JSTOR 10.1086430653 . PMID 16011298 . S2CID 24738716 . Tobies Renate 2012. Iris Runge - A Life at the Crossroads of Mathematics Science and Industry . Basel: Birkheauser. p. 116. ISBN 978-3034802512 . Gimbel Steven 2015. Einstein - His Space and Times . New Haven: Yale University Press. p. 111. ISBN 978-0300196719 . Einstein 1949 . Rowe David E.; Schulmann Robert 8 June 2007a. David A. Walsh ed.. What Were Einsteins Politics? . History News Network . Archived from the original on 3 February 2019 . Retrieved 29 July 2012 . Rowe Schulmann 2013 pp. 412 413 . Isaacson 2007 pp. 487 494 550. Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 4 February 1948 No. 2 3537: A Reply to the Soviet Scientists December 1947 Waldrop Mitch 19 April 2017. Why the FBI Kept a 1 400-Page File on Einstein . National Geographic . Archived from the original on 26 May 2017 . Retrieved 7 June 2017 . Einstein on Gandhi Einsteins letter to Gandhi Courtesy:Saraswati Albano-Muller Notes by Einstein on Gandhi Source: The Hebrew University of Jerusalem . Gandhiserve.org. 18 October 1931. Archived from the original on 17 January 2012 . Retrieved 24 January 2012 . Einsteins letter and Gandhis answer . Archived from the original on 9 June 2014 . Retrieved 22 August 2021 . gandhiserve.org Dennis Overbye 25 January 2005. Brace Yourself! Here Comes Einsteins Year . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 30 October 2020 . Retrieved 27 October 2020 . Hebrew University ... which he helped found History . Hebrew University . Isaacson 2007 p. 290. Rowe Schulmann 2007 p. 161. Rowe Schulmann 2007 p. 158. Rowe Schulmann 2007 p. 33. Rosenkranz Zeev 2011. Einstein Before Israel: Zionist Icon Or Iconoclast? . Princeton University Press. pp. 45. ISBN 978-0-691-14412-2 . ISRAEL: Einstein Declines . Time . 1 December 1952. Archived from the original on 18 May 2008 . Retrieved 31 March 2010 . Rosenkranz Zeev 6 November 2002. The Einstein Scrapbook . Baltimore Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press . p. 103. ISBN 978-0-8018-7203-7 . a b Isaacson 2007 p. 522. Walter Isaacson 2007. Einstein: His Life and Universe . pp. 549550. Hitchens Christopher ed. 2007. Selected Writings on Religion: Albert Einstein . The Portable Atheist: Essential Readings for the Nonbeliever . Da Capo Press. p. 155. ISBN 978-0-306-81608-6 . Isaacson 2008 p. 325 . a b Calaprice 2000 p. 218. Isaacson 2008 p. 390 . Calaprice 2010 p. 340 . Letter to M. Berkowitz 25 October 1950 . Retrieved 16 February 2017 . Einstein Archive 59215. Walter Isaacson 2007. Einstein: His Life and Universe . pp. 550551. Dowbiggin Ian 2003. A Merciful End . New York: Oxford University Press Dowbiggin Ian 9 January 2003. p. 41 . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-803515-2 . Retrieved 26 March 2018 . Einstein 1995 p. 62 . Dvorsky George 23 October 2012. Einsteins I dont believe in God letter has sold on eBay... io9 . Archived from the original on 9 December 2015 . Retrieved 23 April 2019 . Albert Einstein 18791955 . International Vegetarian Union. Was Albert Einstein vegan? . AreTheyVegan.com . 27 March 2020. Duchen Jessica 28 January 2011. The relative beauty of the violin . The Independent . Archived from the original on 22 July 2020 . Retrieved 23 August 2017 . Einstein and his love of music PDF . Physics World . January 2005. Archived from the original PDF on 28 August 2015. a b c d Peter Galison ; Gerald James Holton ; Silvan S. Schweber 2008. Einstein for the 21st Century: His Legacy in Science Art and Modern Culture . Princeton University Press. pp. 161 164. ISBN 978-0-691-13520-5 . Article Alfred Einstein in The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians ed. Stanley Sadie . 20 vol. London Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 1980. ISBN 978-1-56159-174-9 The Concise Edition of Bakers Biographical Dictionary of Musicians 8th ed. Revised by Nicolas Slonimsky . New York Schirmer Books 1993. ISBN 978-0-02-872416-4 Cariaga Daniel Not Taking It with You: A Tale of Two Estates Los Angeles Times 22 December 1985. Retrieved April 2012. Relaxed Einstein signs for a fellow violinist before sailing to Germany for the last time . RR Auction . 2010. Archived from the original on 24 May 2013 . Retrieved 6 June 2012 . The Case of the Scientist with a Pulsating Mass . Medscape . 14 June 2002. Archived from the original on 8 July 2009 . Retrieved 11 June 2007 . Albert Einstein Archives April 1955. Draft of projected Telecast Israel Independence Day April 1955 last statement ever written . Einstein Archives Online. Archived from the original on 13 March 2007 . Retrieved 14 March 2007 . Cohen J. R.; Graver L. M. November 1995. The ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm of Albert Einstein . Surgery Gynecology Obstetrics . 170 5: 455458. PMID 2183375 . Cosgrove Ben 14 March 2014. The Day Albert Einstein Died: A Photographers Story . Time . Archived from the original on 12 November 2014 . Retrieved 24 April 2018 . The Long Strange Journey of Einsteins Brain . NPR . Archived from the original on 14 July 2019 . Retrieved 3 October 2007 . Cosgrove Benjamin; Morse Ralph 14 March 2014. The Day Albert Einstein Died: A Photographers Story . Life . Archived from the original on 19 March 2021 . Retrieved 10 March 2021 . OConnor J. J.; Robertson E.F. 1997. Albert Einstein . The MacTutor History of Mathematics archive . School of Mathematics and Statistics University of St. Andrews. Archived from the original on 13 February 2007 . Retrieved 11 March 2007 . Late City ed. 18 April 1955. Written at Princeton NJ. Dr. Albert Einstein Dies in Sleep at 76; World Mourns Loss of Great Scientist Rupture of Aorta Causes Death Body Cremated Memorial Here Set . The New York Times . Vol. CIV no. 35 514. New York published 19 April 1955. p. 1. ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 25 May 2014 . Retrieved 24 May 2014 . Oppenheimer J. Robert March 1979. Oppenheimer on Einstein . Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists . 35 3: 38. Bibcode : 1979BuAtS..35c..36O . doi : 10.108000963402.1979.11458597 . Retrieved 12 January 2017 . Unna Issachar 22 June 2007. An Ongoing Power of Attraction . Haaretz . Archived from the original on 16 June 2021 . Retrieved 15 June 2021 . a b Paul Arthur Schilpp ed. 1951. Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist . Vol. II. New York: Harper and Brothers Publishers Harper Torchbook edition. pp. 730746. . His non-scientific works include: About Zionism: Speeches and Lectures by Professor Albert Einstein 1930 Why War? 1933 co-authored by Sigmund Freud The World As I See It 1934 Out of My Later Years 1950 and a book on science for the general reader The Evolution of Physics 1938 co-authored by Leopold Infeld . Stachel et al. 2008 . Overbye Dennis 4 December 2014. Thousands of Einstein Documents Are Now a Click Away . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 1 January 2022 . Retrieved 4 January 2015 . a b Einstein archive at the Instituut-Lorentz . Archived from the original on 19 May 2015 . Retrieved 21 August 2005 . . Instituut-Lorentz . 2005. Retrieved 21 November 2005. Pietrow Alexander G.M. 2019. Investigations into the origin of Einsteins Sink . Studium . 11 4: 260268. arXiv : 1905.09022 . Bibcode : 2019Studi..11E...1P . doi : 10.18352studium.10183 inactive 11 September 2024. S2CID 162168640 . cite journal : CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of September 2024 link a b Kuepper Hans-Josef. List of Scientific Publications of Albert Einstein . Einstein-website.de. Archived from the original on 8 May 2013 . Retrieved 3 April 2011 . Levenson Thomas. Genius Among Geniuses . Einsteins Big Idea . Boston: WBGH. Archived from the original on 6 November 2018 . Retrieved 20 June 2015 via NOVA by Public Broadcasting Service PBS. a b c Einstein 1905a . Das Ashok 2003. Lectures on quantum mechanics . Hindustan Book Agency. p. 59. ISBN 978-81-85931-41-8 . Spielberg Nathan; Anderson Bryon D. 1995. Seven ideas that shook the universe 2nd ed.. John Wiley Sons. p. 263 . ISBN 978-0-471-30606-1 . Einstein 1905c . a b Einstein 1905d . Major Fouad G. 2007. The quantum beat: principles and applications of atomic clocks 2nd ed.. Springer. p. 142. ISBN 978-0-387-69533-4 . Retrieved 18 June 2015 . Lindsay Robert Bruce; Margenau Henry 1981. Foundations of physics . Ox Bow Press. p. 330. ISBN 978-0-918024-17-6 . Retrieved 18 June 2015 . Einstein 1905e . Folsing 1997 pp. 178198. Stachel 2002 pp. vi 15 90 131 215 . Pais 1982 pp. 382386. Pais 1982 pp. 151152. Fraknoi Andrew; et al. 2022. Astronomy 2e 2e ed.. OpenStax. pp. 800815. ISBN 978-1-951693-50-3 . OCLC 1322188620 . Einstein 1923 . Pais 1982 pp. 179183. Stachel et al. 2008 pp. 273274 vol. 2: The Swiss Years: Writings 19001909. Pais 1982 pp. 194195. Einstein 1916 . Einstein 1918 . a b c Nadia Drake 11 February 2016. Found! Gravitational Waves or a Wrinkle in Spacetime . National Geographic . Archived from the original on 12 February 2016 . Retrieved 6 July 2016 . Gravity investigated with a binary pulsar-Press Release: The 1993 Nobel Prize in Physics . Nobel Foundation. Archived from the original on 10 August 2018 . Retrieved 6 July 2016 . Abbott Benjamin P.; et al. LIGO Scientific Collaboration and Virgo Collaboration 2016. Observation of Gravitational Waves from a Binary Black Hole Merger PDF . Phys. Rev. Lett. 116 6: 061102. arXiv : 1602.03837 . Bibcode : 2016PhRvL.116f1102A . doi : 10.1103PhysRevLett.116.061102 . PMID 26918975 . S2CID 124959784 . Archived PDF from the original on 16 February 2016 . Retrieved 6 July 2016 . Gravitational Waves: Ripples in the fabric of space-time . LIGO MIT. 11 February 2016. Archived from the original on 19 February 2016 . Retrieved 12 February 2016 . Scientists make first direct detection of gravitational waves . Jennifer Chu . MIT News. 11 February 2016. Archived from the original on 7 April 2019 . Retrieved 12 February 2016 . Ghosh Pallab 11 February 2016. Einsteins gravitational waves seen from black holes . BBC News . Archived from the original on 11 February 2016 . Retrieved 12 February 2016 . Overbye Dennis 11 February 2016. Gravitational Waves Detected Confirming Einsteins Theory . The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 11 February 2016 . Retrieved 12 February 2016 . Norton John 1984. How Einstein Found His Field Equations: 19121915 . Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences . 14 2: 253316. doi : 10.230727757535 . ISSN 0073-2672 . JSTOR 27757535 . van Dongen Jeroen 2010 Einsteins Unification Cambridge University Press p. 23. Einstein 1917a . Pais 1994 pp. 285286. North J.D. 1965. The Measure of the Universe: A History of Modern Cosmology . New York: Dover. pp. 8183. a b Einstein 1931 . a b ORaifeartaigh C; McCann B 2014. Einsteins cosmic model of 1931 revisited: An analysis and translation of a forgotten model of the universe PDF . The European Physical Journal H . 39 2014: 6385. arXiv : 1312.2192 . Bibcode : 2014EPJH...39...63O . doi : 10.1140epjhe2013-40038-x . S2CID 53419239 . Archived PDF from the original on 29 September 2020 . Retrieved 31 December 2019 . Einstein de Sitter 1932 . Nussbaumer Harry 2014. Einsteins conversion from his static to an expanding universe . Eur. Phys. J. H . 39 1: 3762. arXiv : 1311.2763 . Bibcode : 2014EPJH...39...37N . doi : 10.1140epjhe2013-40037-6 . S2CID 122011477 . Nussbaumer and Bieri 2009. Discovering the Expanding Universe . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 144152. Zimmer Carl 9 June 2013. The Genius of Getting It Wrong . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 1 January 2022. Castelvecchi Davide 2014. Einsteins lost theory uncovered . Nature News Comment . 506 7489: 418419. Bibcode : 2014Natur.506..418C . doi : 10.1038506418a . PMID 24572403 . S2CID 205080245 . On His 135th Birthday Einstein is Still Full of Surprises . Out There . 14 March 2014. Archived from the original on 18 March 2014 . Retrieved 17 March 2014 . a b ORaifeartaigh C.; McCann B.; Nahm W.; Mitton S. 2014. Einsteins steady-state theory: an abandoned model of the cosmos PDF . Eur. Phys. J. H . 39 3: 353369. arXiv : 1402.0132 . Bibcode : 2014EPJH...39..353O . doi : 10.1140epjhe2014-50011-x . S2CID 38384067 . Archived PDF from the original on 29 September 2020 . Retrieved 31 December 2019 . a b Nussbaumer Harry 2014. Einsteins aborted attempt at a dynamic steady-state universe . In memoriam Hilmar Duerbeck . p. 463. arXiv : 1402.4099 . Bibcode : 2014arXiv1402.4099N . ISBN 978-3-944913-56-8 . Hoyle 1948. A New Model for the Expanding Universe . MNRAS . 108 5: 372. Bibcode : 1948MNRAS.108..372H . doi : 10.1093mnras108.5.372 . Bondi; Gold 1948. The Steady-State Theory of the Expanding Universe . MNRAS . 108 3: 252. Bibcode : 1948MNRAS.108..252B . doi : 10.1093mnras108.3.252 . Amir Aczel 7 March 2014. Einsteins Lost Theory Describes a Universe Without a Big Bang . The Crux . Archived from the original on 19 March 2014 . Retrieved 17 March 2014 . Byers Nina 23 September 1998. E. Noethers Discovery of the Deep Connection Between Symmetries and Conservation Laws . arXiv : physics9807044 . Goldberg J. N. 1958. Conservation laws in general relativity . Physical Review . 111 1: 315320. Bibcode : 1958PhRv..111..315G . doi : 10.1103PhysRev.111.315 . Einstein Rosen 1935 . 2015 General Relativitys Centennial . American Physical Society . 2015. Archived from the original on 15 November 2018 . Retrieved 7 April 2017 . Lindley David 25 March 2005. Focus: The Birth of Wormholes . Physics . 15 : 11. doi : 10.1103physrevfocus.15.11 . Wheeler John Archibald 18 June 2010. Geons Black Holes and Quantum Foam: A Life in Physics . W. W. Norton Company. ISBN 978-0-393-07948-7 . Kersting Magdalena May 2019. Free fall in curved spacetimehow to visualise gravity in general relativity . Physics Education . 54 3: 035008. Bibcode : 2019PhyEd..54c5008K . doi : 10.10881361-6552ab08f5 . hdl : 1085274677 . ISSN 0031-9120 . S2CID 127471222 . Tamir M 2012. Proving the principle: Taking geodesic dynamics too seriously in Einsteins theory PDF . Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics . 43 2: 137154. Bibcode : 2012SHPMP..43..137T . doi : 10.1016j.shpsb.2011.12.002 . Malament David 2012. A Remark About the Geodesic Principle in General Relativity PDF . In Frappier M.; Brown D.; DiSalle R. eds.. Analysis and Interpretation in the Exact Sciences . The Western Ontario Series in Philosophy of Science. Vol. 78. Springer. pp. 245252. doi : 10.1007978-94-007-2582-914 . ISBN 978-94-007-2581-2 . Though the geodesic principle can be recovered as theorem in general relativity it is not a consequence of Einsteins equation or the conservation principle alone. Other assumptions are needed to derive the theorems in question. Walter Isaacson 2007. Einstein: His Life and Universe . p. 576. Celebrating Einstein Solid Cold. U.S. DOE . Archived from the original on 19 July 2017 . Retrieved 21 February 2011 . Office of Scientific and Technical Information 2011. Einstein 1924 . Cornell and Wieman Share 2001 Nobel Prize in Physics . 9 October 2001. Archived from the original on 10 June 2007 . Retrieved 11 June 2007 . Pais 1982 p. 522. Stachel et al. 2008 pp. 270ff vol. 4: The Swiss Years: Writings 19121914. Einstein 1917b . Duncan Anthony; Janssen Michel 2019. Constructing quantum mechanics. Volume 1 The scaffold : 19001923 1st ed.. Oxford: Oxford University Press . pp. 133142. ISBN 978-0-19-258422-9 . OCLC 1119627546 . Hanle Paul A. July 1979. The Schrodinger-Einstein correspondence and the sources of wave mechanics . American Journal of Physics . 47 7: 644648. Bibcode : 1979AmJPh..47..644H . doi : 10.11191.11950 . ISSN 0002-9505 . Raman V. V.; Forman Paul 1969. Why Was It Schrodinger Who Developed de Broglies Ideas? . Historical Studies in the Physical Sciences . 1 : 291314. doi : 10.230727757299 . ISSN 0073-2672 . JSTOR 27757299 . Andrews Robert 2003. The New Penguin Dictionary of Modern Quotations . Penguin UK. p. 499. ISBN 978-0-14-196531-4 . Retrieved 18 June 2015 . Pais Abraham October 1979. Einstein and the quantum theory PDF . Reviews of Modern Physics . 51 4: 863914. Bibcode : 1979RvMP...51..863P . doi : 10.1103RevModPhys.51.863 . Archived PDF from the original on 29 August 2019 . Retrieved 18 November 2019 . Bohr N. Discussions with Einstein on Epistemological Problems in Atomic Physics . The Value of Knowledge: A Miniature Library of Philosophy . Marxists Internet Archive . Archived from the original on 13 September 2010 . Retrieved 30 August 2010 . From Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist 1949 publ. Cambridge University Press 1949. Niels Bohrs report of conversations with Einstein. Einstein 1969 . Schlosshauer Maximilian; Kofler Johannes; Zeilinger Anton 1 August 2013. A snapshot of foundational attitudes toward quantum mechanics . Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics . 44 3: 222230. arXiv : 1301.1069 . Bibcode : 2013SHPMP..44..222S . doi : 10.1016j.shpsb.2013.04.004 . ISSN 1355-2198 . S2CID 55537196 . a b Howard 1990 . a b Harrigan Spekkens 2010 . Einstein Podolsky Rosen 1935 . Peres 2002 . Mermin 1993 . Penrose 2007 . Bell 1966 . Fine 2017 . Einstein 1950 . Goenner Hubert F. M. 1 December 2004. On the History of Unified Field Theories . Living Reviews in Relativity . 7 1: 2. Bibcode : 2004LRR.....7....2G . doi : 10.12942lrr-2004-2 . ISSN 1433-8351 . PMC 5256024 . PMID 28179864 . Richardson O. W. 1908. A Mechanical Effect Accompanying Magnetization . Physical Review . Series I. 26 3: 248253. Bibcode : 1908PhRvI..26..248R . doi : 10.1103PhysRevSeriesI.26.248 . Einstein A.; de Haas W. J. 1915. Experimenteller Nachweis der Ampereschen Molekularstrome Experimental Proof of Amperes Molecular Currents. Deutsche Physikalische Gesellschaft Verhandlungen in German. 17 : 152170. Einstein A.; de Haas W. J. 1915. Experimental proof of the existence of Amperes molecular currents PDF . Koninklijke Akademie van Wetenschappen te Amsterdam Proceedings . 18 : 696711. Bibcode : 1915KNAB...18..696E . San Miguel Alfonso; Pallandre Bernard 13 March 2024. Revisiting the Einstein-de Haas experiment: the Ampere Museums hidden treasure PDF . Europhysics News . 55 4: 1214. Bibcode : 2024ENews..55...28S . doi : 10.1051epn2024409 . Johnston Hamish 17 March 2024. Einsteins only experiment is found in French museum . Physics World . Retrieved 24 March 2024 . Goettling Gary. Einsteins refrigerator . Archived from the original on 25 May 2005. Georgia Tech Alumni Magazine . 1998. Retrieved 12 November 2014. Leo Szilard a Hungarian physicist who later worked on the Manhattan Project is credited with the discovery of the chain reaction Alok Jha 21 September 2008. Einstein fridge design can help global cooling . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 24 January 2011 . Retrieved 22 February 2011 . Electrodynamic movement of fluid metals particularly for refrigerating machines . Device in particular for sound reproduction devices in which changes in electrical current through magnetostriction cause movements of a magnetic body . Albert Einsteins patents. 2006. World Pat Inf. 282 15965. M. Trainer. doi: 10.1016j.wpi.2005.10.012 Obituary . The New York Times . 12 July 1986. Archived from the original on 10 September 2017 . Retrieved 3 April 2011 . Letters Reveal Einstein Love Life . BBC News . 11 July 2006. Archived from the original on 2 May 2019 . Retrieved 14 March 2007 . United States District Court Central District of California Case No. CV1003790 AHM JCx . 15 October 2012. Archived from the original on 21 January 2020 . Retrieved 24 November 2019 . United States District Court Central District of California Case No.: CV-10-3790-AB JCx . 15 January 2015. Archived from the original on 25 July 2020 . Retrieved 24 November 2019 . Einstein . Corbis Rights Representation. Archived from the original on 19 August 2008 . Retrieved 8 August 2008 . Place name detail: Mount Einstein . New Zealand Gazetteer . New Zealand Geographic Board . Retrieved 21 August 2022 . Halpern Paul 2019. Albert Einstein celebrity scientist . Physics Today . 72 4: 3845. doi : 10.1063PT.3.4183 . S2CID 187603798 . Archived from the original on 14 April 2021 . Retrieved 21 February 2021 . Fahy Declan 2015. A Brief History Of Scientific Celebrity . Skeptical Inquirer . Vol. 39 no. 4. Archived from the original on 10 May 2021 . Retrieved 21 February 2021 . Missner Marshall May 1985. Why Einstein Became Famous in America . Social Studies of Science . 15 2: 267291. doi : 10.1177030631285015002003 . JSTOR 285389 . S2CID 143398600 . Libman E. 14 January 1939. Disguise . The New Yorker . Archived from the original on 25 July 2020 . Retrieved 15 April 2020 . McTee Cindy. Einsteins Dream for orchestra . Cindymctee.com. Archived from the original on 18 April 2017 . Retrieved 17 July 2010 . Golden Frederic 3 January 2000. Person of the Century: Albert Einstein . Time . Archived from the original on 21 February 2006 . Retrieved 25 February 2006 . Novak Matt 16 May 2015. 9 Albert Einstein Quotes That Are Completely Fake . Gizmodo . Archived from the original on 5 July 2018 . Retrieved 4 May 2018 . Did Albert Einstein Humiliate an Atheist Professor? . Snopes. 29 June 2004. Archived from the original on 4 November 2021 . Retrieved 4 May 2018 . Einsteinium Element . Royal Society of Chemistry . Retrieved 16 December 2022 . Einstein Papers Project . California Institute of Technology. Archived from the original on 5 November 2022 . Retrieved 5 November 2022 . Albert Einstein . Princeton University Press . Retrieved 5 November 2022 . Works cited Bell J. S. 1966. On the problem of hidden variables in quantum mechanics . Reviews of Modern Physics . 38 3: 447452. Bibcode : 1966RvMP...38..447B . doi : 10.1103revmodphys.38.447 . OSTI 1444158 . Calaprice Alice 2000. The Expanded Quotable Einstein . Princeton University Press. Calaprice Alice 2005. The New Quotable Einstein . Princeton University Press. Archived from the original on 22 June 2009. Calaprice Alice; Lipscombe Trevor 2005. Albert Einstein: A Biography . Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-313-33080-3 . Calaprice Alice 2010. The Ultimate Quotable Einstein . Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1-4008-3596-6 . Calaprice Alice; Kennefick Daniel; Schulmann Robert 2015. An Einstein Encyclopedia . Princeton University Press. Bibcode : 2016eien.book.....C . Chaplin Charles 1964. Charles Chaplin: My Autobiography . New York: Simon and Schuster. Clark Ronald W. 1971. Einstein: The Life and Times . New York: Avon Books. ISBN 978-0-380-44123-5 . Folsing Albrecht 1997. Albert Einstein . Translated by Osers Ewald. Abridged by Ewald Osers. New York: Penguin Viking. ISBN 978-0-670-85545-2 . Fine Arthur 2017. The Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen Argument in Quantum Theory . Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab Stanford University. Galison Peter Winter 2000. Einsteins Clocks: The Question of Time . Critical Inquiry . 26 2: 355389. doi : 10.1086448970 . JSTOR 1344127 . S2CID 144484466 . Glick Thomas F. ed. 1987. The Comparative Reception of Relativity . Kluwer Academic Publishers. ISBN 978-90-277-2498-4 . Harrigan Nicholas; Spekkens Robert W. 2010. Einstein incompleteness and the epistemic view of quantum states . Foundations of Physics . 40 2: 125. arXiv : 0706.2661 . Bibcode : 2010FoPh...40..125H . doi : 10.1007s10701-009-9347-0 . S2CID 32755624 . Highfield Roger ; Carter Paul 1993. The Private Lives of Albert Einstein . London: Faber and Faber. ISBN 978-0-571-17170-5 . Hoffmann Banesh 1972. Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel . Collaboration with Helen Dukas. New York: Viking Press. ISBN 978-0-670-11181-7 . Holton Gerald April 1984. The migration of physicists to the United States . Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists . 40 4. Educational Foundation for Nuclear Science: 1824. Bibcode : 1984BuAtS..40d..18H . doi : 10.108000963402.1984.11459207 . Howard D. 1990. Nicht Sein Kann was Nicht Sein Darf or the Prehistory of EPR 19091935: Einsteins Early Worries about the Quantum Mechanics of Composite Systems . Sixty-Two Years of Uncertainty . NATO ASI Series. Vol. 226. Springer. pp. 61111. doi : 10.1007978-1-4684-8771-86 . ISBN 978-1-4684-8773-2 . Isaacson Walter 2007. Einstein: His Life and Universe . New York: Simon Schuster Paperbacks. ISBN 978-0-7432-6473-0 . Isaacson Walter 2008. Einstein: His Life and Universe . New York: Simon Schuster. ISBN 978-1-84739-589-4 . Mermin N. David July 1993. Hidden Variables and the Two Theorems of John Bell PDF . Reviews of Modern Physics . 65 3: 80315. arXiv : 1802.10119 . Bibcode : 1993RvMP...65..803M . doi : 10.1103RevModPhys.65.803 . S2CID 119546199 . Neffe Jurgen 2007. Einstein: A Biography . Translated by Frisch Shelley. Farrar Straus and Giroux . ISBN 978-0-374-14664-1 . Pais Abraham 1982. Subtle is the Lord: The Science and the Life of Albert Einstein . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-853907-0 . Pais Abraham 1994. Einstein Lived Here . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-280672-7 . Penrose Roger 2007. The Road to Reality . Vintage Books. ISBN 978-0-679-77631-4 . Peres Asher 2002. Quantum Theory: Concepts and Methods . Kluwer. p. 149. Robeson Paul 2002. Paul Robeson Speaks . Citadel. p. 333. Rowe David E.; Schulmann Robert eds. 2007. Einstein on Politics: His Private Thoughts and Public Stands on Nationalism Zionism War Peace and the Bomb . Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-12094-2 . Rowe David E.; Schulmann Robert eds. 2013. Einstein on Politics: His Private Thoughts and Public Stands on Nationalism Zionism War Peace and the Bomb . Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1-4008-4828-7 . Scheideler Britta 2002. The Scientist as Moral Authority: Albert Einstein between Elitism and Democracy 19141933 . Historical Studies in the Physical and Biological Sciences . 32 2: 319346. doi : 10.1525hsps.2002.32.2.319 . JSTOR 10.1525hsps.2002.32.2.319 . Stachel John J. 1966. Albert Einstein and Mileva Maric PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 7 March 2008 . Retrieved 13 May 2016 . Stachel John J. 2002. Einstein from B to Z . Einstein Studies. Vol. 9. Birkhauser. ISBN 978-0-8176-4143-6 . OCLC 237532460 . Weinstein G. 2015. General Relativity Conflict and Rivalries: Einsteins Polemics with Physicists . Newcastle upon Tyne UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4438-8362-7 . Further reading Brian Denis 1996. Einstein: A Life . New York: John Wiley. ISBN 978-0471114598 . Brian Denis 2005. The Unexpected Einstein: The Real Man Behind the Icon . New York: John Wiley. ISBN 978-0471718406 . Gimbel Steven 2015. Einstein: His Space and Times . Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0300196719 . Gimbel Steven 2012. Einsteins Jewish Science: Physics at the Intersection of Politics and Religion . Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-1421405544 . Gordin Michael D. 2020. Einstein in Bohemia . Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-17737-3 . Lindemann Frederick Alexander 1922. Einstein Albert . In Chisholm Hugh ed.. Encyclopdia Britannica 12th ed.. London New York: The Encyclopdia Britannica Company. Moring Gary 2004. The complete idiots guide to understanding Einstein 1st ed.. Indianapolis Indiana: Alpha books Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-02-863180-6 . idiots guide to Einstein. Oppenheimer J. Robert 1971. On Albert Einstein . Science and Synthesis: An International Colloquium Organized by Unesco on the Tenth Anniversary of the Death of Albert Einstein and Teilhard de Chardin . Lecture delivered at the UNESCO House in Paris on 13 December 1965: 812 208. or On Albert Einstein by Robert Oppenheimer . The New York Review of Books . 17 March 1966. Parker Barry 2000. Einsteins Brainchild: Relativity Made Relatively Easy! . Illustrated by Lori Scoffield-Beer. Prometheus Books. ISBN 978-1-59102-522-1 . Rogers Donald W. 2005. Einsteins Other Theory: The Planck-Bose-Einstein Theory of Heat Capacity . Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-11826-0 . Schweber Silvan S. 2008. Einstein and Oppenheimer: The Meaning of Genius . Harvard University Press. ISBN 978-0-674-02828-9 . Stone A. Douglas 2013. Einstein and the Quantum . Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-0-691-13968-5 . Weinberg Steven 2005. Einsteins mistakes . Physics Today . 58 11: 3135. Bibcode : 2005PhT....58k..31W . doi : 10.10631.2155755 . External links Albert Einstein at Wikipedias sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Scholia has an author profile for Albert Einstein . Works by Albert Einstein at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Albert Einstein at the Internet Archive Works by Albert Einstein at LibriVox public domain audiobooks Einsteins Personal Correspondence: Religion Politics The Holocaust and Philosophy Shapell Manuscript Foundation Federal Bureau of Investigation file on Albert Einstein Einstein and his love of music Physics World Albert Einstein on Nobelprize.org including the Nobel Lecture 11 July 1923 Fundamental ideas and problems of the theory of relativity Albert Einstein Archives Online 80 000 Documents Archived 11 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine MSNBC 19 March 2012 Einsteins declaration of intention for American citizenship on the World Digital Library Albert Einstein Collection at Brandeis University The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein Digital Einstein at Princeton University Newspaper clippings about Albert Einstein in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW Home page of Albert Einstein at The Institute for Advanced Study Albert The Digital Repository of the IAS which contains many digitized original documents and photographs Albert Einstein at IMDb v t e Albert Einstein Physics Theory of relativity Special relativity General relativity Massenergy equivalence Emc 2 Brownian motion Photoelectric effect Einstein coefficients Einstein solid Equivalence principle Einstein field equations Einstein radius Einstein relation kinetic theory Cosmological constant BoseEinstein condensate BoseEinstein statistics BoseEinstein correlations EinsteinCartan theory EinsteinInfeldHoffmann equations Einsteinde Haas effect EPR paradox BohrEinstein debates Teleparallelism Thought experiments Unsuccessful investigations Waveparticle duality Gravitational wave Tea leaf paradox Works Annus mirabilis papers 1905 Investigations on the Theory of Brownian Movement 1905 Relativity: The Special and the General Theory 1916 The Meaning of Relativity 1922 The World as I See It 1934 The Evolution of Physics 1938 Why Socialism? 1949 RussellEinstein Manifesto 1955 In popular culture Die Grundlagen der Einsteinschen Relativitats-Theorie 1922 documentary The Einstein Theory of Relativity 1923 documentary Relics: Einsteins Brain 1994 documentary Insignificance 1985 film Young Einstein 1988 film Picasso at the Lapin Agile 1993 play I.Q. 1994 film Einsteins Gift 2003 play Einstein and Eddington 2008 TV film Genius 2017 series Oppenheimer 2023 film Prizes Albert Einstein Award Albert Einstein Medal Kalinga Prize Albert Einstein Peace Prize Albert Einstein World Award of Science Einstein Prize for Laser Science Einstein Prize APS Books about Einstein Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel Einstein and Religion Einstein for Beginners Einstein: His Life and Universe Einsteins Cosmos I Am Albert Einstein Introducing Relativity Subtle is the Lord Family Mileva Maric first wife Elsa Einstein second wife; cousin Lieserl Einstein daughter Hans Albert Einstein son Pauline Koch mother Hermann Einstein father Maja Einstein sister Eduard Einstein son Robert Einstein cousin Bernhard Caesar Einstein grandson Evelyn Einstein granddaughter Thomas Martin Einstein great-grandson Siegbert Einstein distant cousin Related Awards and honors Brain House Memorial Political views Religious views Things named after EinsteinOppenheimer relationship Albert Einstein Archives Einsteins Blackboard Einstein Papers Project Einstein refrigerator Einsteinhaus Einsteinium Max Talmey Emergency Committee of Atomic Scientists Category Links to related articles v t e Copley Medallists 19011950 Josiah Willard Gibbs 1901 Joseph Lister 1902 Eduard Suess 1903 William Crookes 1904 Dmitri Mendeleev 1905 Elie Metchnikoff 1906 Albert A. Michelson 1907 Alfred Russel Wallace 1908 George William Hill 1909 Francis Galton 1910 George Darwin 1911 Felix Klein 1912 Ray Lankester 1913 J. J. Thomson 1914 Ivan Pavlov 1915 James Dewar 1916 Pierre Paul Emile Roux 1917 Hendrik Lorentz 1918 William Bayliss 1919 Horace Tabberer Brown 1920 Joseph Larmor 1921 Ernest Rutherford 1922 Horace Lamb 1923 Edward Albert Sharpey-Schafer 1924 Albert Einstein 1925 Frederick Gowland Hopkins 1926 Charles Scott Sherrington 1927 Charles Algernon Parsons 1928 Max Planck 1929 William Henry Bragg 1930 Arthur Schuster 1931 George Ellery Hale 1932 Theobald Smith 1933 John Scott Haldane 1934 Charles Thomson Rees Wilson 1935 Arthur Evans 1936 Henry Hallett Dale 1937 Niels Bohr 1938 Thomas Hunt Morgan 1939 Paul Langevin 1940 Thomas Lewis 1941 Robert Robinson 1942 Joseph Barcroft 1943 Geoffrey Ingram Taylor 1944 Oswald Avery 1945 Edgar Douglas Adrian 1946 G. H. Hardy 1947 Archibald Hill 1948 George de Hevesy 1949 James Chadwick 1950 v t e Laureates of the Nobel Prize in Physics 19011925 1901: Rontgen 1902: Lorentz Zeeman 1903: Becquerel P. Curie M. Curie 1904: Rayleigh 1905: Lenard 1906: J. J. Thomson 1907: Michelson 1908: Lippmann 1909: Marconi Braun 1910: Van der Waals 1911: Wien 1912: Dalen 1913: Kamerlingh Onnes 1914: Laue 1915: W. L. Bragg W. H. Bragg 1916 1917: Barkla 1918: Planck 1919: Stark 1920: Guillaume 1921: Einstein 1922: N. Bohr 1923: Millikan 1924: M. Siegbahn 1925: Franck Hertz 19261950 1926: Perrin 1927: Compton C. Wilson 1928: O. Richardson 1929: De Broglie 1930: Raman 1931 1932: Heisenberg 1933: Schrodinger Dirac 1934 1935: Chadwick 1936: Hess C. D. Anderson 1937: Davisson G. P. Thomson 1938: Fermi 1939: Lawrence 1940 1941 1942 1943: Stern 1944: Rabi 1945: Pauli 1946: Bridgman 1947: Appleton 1948: Blackett 1949: Yukawa 1950: Powell 19511975 1951: Cockcroft Walton 1952: Bloch Purcell 1953: Zernike 1954: Born Bothe 1955: Lamb Kusch 1956: Shockley Bardeen Brattain 1957: C. N. Yang T. D. Lee 1958: Cherenkov Frank Tamm 1959: Segre Chamberlain 1960: Glaser 1961: Hofstadter Mossbauer 1962: Landau 1963: Wigner Goeppert Mayer Jensen 1964: Townes Basov Prokhorov 1965: Tomonaga Schwinger Feynman 1966: Kastler 1967: Bethe 1968: Alvarez 1969: Gell-Mann 1970: Alfven Neel 1971: Gabor 1972: Bardeen Cooper Schrieffer 1973: Esaki Giaever Josephson 1974: Ryle Hewish 1975: A. Bohr Mottelson Rainwater 19762000 1976: Richter Ting 1977: P. W. Anderson Mott Van Vleck 1978: Kapitsa Penzias R. Wilson 1979: Glashow Salam Weinberg 1980: Cronin Fitch 1981: Bloembergen Schawlow K. Siegbahn 1982: K. Wilson 1983: Chandrasekhar Fowler 1984: Rubbia Van der Meer 1985: von Klitzing 1986: Ruska Binnig Rohrer 1987: Bednorz Muller 1988: Lederman Schwartz Steinberger 1989: Ramsey Dehmelt Paul 1990: Friedman Kendall R. Taylor 1991: de Gennes 1992: Charpak 1993: Hulse J. Taylor 1994: Brockhouse Shull 1995: Perl Reines 1996: D. Lee Osheroff R. Richardson 1997: Chu Cohen-Tannoudji Phillips 1998: Laughlin Stormer Tsui 1999: t Hooft Veltman 2000: Alferov Kroemer Kilby 2001 present 2001: Cornell Ketterle Wieman 2002: Davis Koshiba Giacconi 2003: Abrikosov Ginzburg Leggett 2004: Gross Politzer Wilczek 2005: Glauber Hall Hansch 2006: Mather Smoot 2007: Fert Grunberg 2008: Nambu Kobayashi Maskawa 2009: Kao Boyle Smith 2010: Geim Novoselov 2011: Perlmutter Schmidt Riess 2012: Wineland Haroche 2013: Englert Higgs 2014: Akasaki Amano Nakamura 2015: Kajita McDonald 2016: Thouless Haldane Kosterlitz 2017: Weiss Barish Thorne 2018: Ashkin Mourou Strickland 2019: Peebles Mayor Queloz 2020: Penrose Genzel Ghez 2021: Parisi Hasselmann Manabe 2022: Aspect Clauser Zeilinger 2023: Agostini Krausz LHuillier 2024: Hopfield Hinton v t e 1921 Nobel Prize laureates Chemistry Frederick Soddy Great Britain Literature 1921 Anatole France France Peace Hjalmar Branting Sweden Christian Lous Lange Norway Physics Albert Einstein Germany Physiology or Medicine None Nobel Prize recipients 1916 1917 1918 1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 1925 1926 v t e Fellows of the Royal Society elected in 1921 Fellows Wilfred Eade Agar Francis William Aston Lawrence Bragg William Thomas Calman Arthur Harry Church Georges Dreyer William Eccles John Charles Grant Ledingham Kennedy Joseph Previte Orton John Herbert Parsons James Charles Philip Alfred Robb Eustace Tennyson dEyncourt Udny Yule Foreign Albert Calmette Henri-Alexandre Deslandres Albert Einstein Albin Haller Edmund Beecher Wilson Pieter Zeeman v t e Relativity Special relativity Background Principle of relativity Galilean relativity Galilean transformation Special relativity Doubly special relativity Fundamental concepts Frame of reference Speed of light Hyperbolic orthogonality Rapidity Maxwells equations Proper length Proper time Proper acceleration Relativistic mass Formulation Lorentz transformation Phenomena Time dilation Massenergy equivalence Emc 2 Length contraction Relativity of simultaneity Relativistic Doppler effect Thomas precession Ladder paradox Twin paradox Terrell rotation Spacetime Light cone World line Minkowski diagram Biquaternions Minkowski space General relativity Background Introduction Mathematical formulation Fundamental concepts Equivalence principle Riemannian geometry Penrose diagram Geodesics Machs principle Formulation ADM formalism BSSN formalism Einstein field equations Linearized gravity Post-Newtonian formalism Raychaudhuri equation HamiltonJacobiEinstein equation Ernst equation Phenomena Black hole Event horizon Singularity Two-body problem Gravitational waves : astronomy detectors LIGO and collaboration Virgo LISA Pathfinder GEO HulseTaylor binary Other tests : precession of Mercury lensing together with Einstein cross and Einstein rings redshift Shapiro delay frame-dragging geodetic effect LenseThirring precession pulsar timing arrays Advanced theories BransDicke theory KaluzaKlein Quantum gravity Solutions Cosmological: FriedmannLemaitreRobertsonWalker Friedmann equations LemaitreTolman Kasner BKL singularity Godel Milne Spherical: Schwarzschild interior TolmanOppenheimerVolkoff equation ReissnerNordstrom Axisymmetric: Kerr KerrNewman WeylLewisPapapetrou TaubNUT van Stockum dust discs Others: pp-wave OzsvathSchucking Alcubierre In computational physics: Numerical relativity Scientists Poincare Lorentz Einstein Hilbert Schwarzschild de Sitter Weyl Eddington Friedmann Lemaitre Milne Robertson Chandrasekhar Zwicky Wheeler Choquet-Bruhat Kerr Zeldovich Novikov Ehlers Geroch Penrose Hawking Taylor Hulse Bondi Misner Yau Thorne Weiss others Category v t e Time 100: The Most Important People of the 20th Century Leaders revolutionaries David Ben-Gurion Winston Churchill Mahatma Gandhi Mikhail Gorbachev Adolf Hitler Ho Chi Minh Pope John Paul II Ruhollah Khomeini Martin Luther King Jr. Vladimir Lenin Nelson Mandela Mao Zedong Ronald Reagan Eleanor Roosevelt Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Margaret Sanger Margaret Thatcher Unknown Tiananmen Square rebel Lech Waesa Artists entertainers Louis Armstrong Lucille Ball The Beatles Marlon Brando Coco Chanel Charlie Chaplin Le Corbusier Bob Dylan T. S. Eliot Aretha Franklin Martha Graham Jim Henson James Joyce Pablo Picasso Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein Bart Simpson Frank Sinatra Steven Spielberg Igor Stravinsky Oprah Winfrey Builders titans Stephen Bechtel Sr. Leo Burnett Willis Carrier Walt Disney Henry Ford Bill Gates Amadeo Giannini Ray Kroc Estee Lauder William Levitt Lucky Luciano Louis B. Mayer Charles E. Merrill Akio Morita Walter Reuther Pete Rozelle David Sarnoff Juan Trippe Sam Walton Thomas J. Watson Jr. Scientists thinkers Leo Baekeland Tim Berners-Lee Rachel Carson Albert Einstein Philo Farnsworth Enrico Fermi Alexander Fleming Sigmund Freud Robert H. Goddard Kurt Godel Edwin Hubble John Maynard Keynes Leakey family Jean Piaget Jonas Salk William Shockley Alan Turing Francis Crick James Watson Ludwig Wittgenstein Wright brothers Heroes icons Muhammad Ali The American G.I. Lady Diana Spencer Anne Frank Billy Graham Che Guevara Edmund Hillary Tenzing Norgay Helen Keller Kennedy family Bruce Lee Charles Lindbergh Harvey Milk Marilyn Monroe Emmeline Pankhurst Rosa Parks Pele Jackie Robinson Andrei Sakharov Mother Teresa Bill W. Portals : Biography Judaism Mathematics Physics Astronomy Stars Spaceflight Outer space Science Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST 2 WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Russia Spain Romania Portugal Netherlands Norway Taiwan Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii ORCID Mathematics Genealogy Project Scopus zbMATH Google Scholar MathSciNet Leopoldina Artists ULAN MusicBrainz People Trove Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA SNAC Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine RISM Retrieved from https:en.wikipedia.orgwindex.php?titleAlbertEinsteinoldid1249743756 Categories : Albert Einstein 1879 births 1955 deaths 19th-century German Jews 20th-century American engineers 20th-century American inventors 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century American physicists 20th-century Swiss inventors Academic staff of Charles University Academic staff of ETH Zurich Academic staff of the University of Bern Academic staff of the University of Zurich American agnostics American Ashkenazi Jews American democratic socialists American humanists American letter writers American male non-fiction writers American Nobel laureates American pacifists American relativity theorists American science writers American Zionists Anti-nationalists Deaths from abdominal aortic aneurysm Denaturalized citizens of Germany Einstein family ETH Zurich alumni European democratic socialists German agnostics German Ashkenazi Jews German emigrants to Switzerland German humanists German male non-fiction writers German Nobel laureates German relativity theorists German Zionists Institute for Advanced Study faculty Jewish agnostics Jewish American non-fiction writers Jewish American physicists Jewish German physicists Jewish emigrants from Nazi Germany to the United States Jewish scientists Jewish socialists Labor Zionists Max Planck Institute directors Members of the American Philosophical Society Members of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences Naturalised citizens of Austria Naturalised citizens of Switzerland Naturalized citizens of the United States Nobel laureates in Physics Pantheists Patent examiners People from Ulm People who lost German citizenship People with multiple citizenship Philosophers of mathematics Philosophers of science Philosophy of science Quantum physicists Recipients of Franklin Medal Scientists from Munich Stateless people Swiss agnostics Swiss Ashkenazi Jews Swiss cosmologists Swiss emigrants to the United States Swiss Nobel laureates Swiss physicists University of Zurich alumni Winners of the Max Planck Medal Wurttemberger emigrants to the United States Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension CS1 German-language sources de Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources fr CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 location test CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of September 2024 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Good articles Use American English from August 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use dmy dates from August 2024 Articles containing German-language text Articles with hAudio microformats Biography with signature Articles with hCards Pages with German IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles needing more detailed references CS1: long volume value Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1922 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Nobelprize template using Wikidata property P8024 This page was last edited on 6 October 2024 at 16:15 UTC . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view