Elvis Presley - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Donate Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 1 Life and career Toggle Life and career subsection 1.1 19351953: early years 1.2 19531956: first recordings 1.2.1 Sam Phillips and Sun Records 1.2.2 Early live performances and RCA Victor contract 1.2.3 Louisiana Hayride radio commercial and first television performances 1.3 19561958: commercial breakout and controversy 1.3.1 First national TV appearances and debut album 1.3.2 Milton Berle Show and Hound Dog 1.3.3 Steve Allen Show and first Sullivan appearance 1.3.4 Crazed crowds and film debut 1.3.5 Leiber and Stoller collaboration and draft notice 1.4 19581960: military service and mothers death 1.5 19601968: focus on films 1.5.1 Elvis Is Back 1.5.2 Lost in Hollywood 1.6 19681973: Comeback 1.6.1 Elvis : the 68 Comeback Special 1.6.2 From Elvis in Memphis and the International 1.6.3 Back on tour and meeting Nixon 1.6.4 Marriage breakdown and Aloha from Hawaii 1.7 19731977: health deterioration and death 1.7.1 Medical crises and last studio sessions 1.7.2 Final months 1.7.3 Death 1.8 Cause of death 1.9 Later developments 2 Artistry Toggle Artistry subsection 2.1 Influences 2.2 Musicianship 2.3 Musical styles and genres 2.4 Vocal style and range 3 Public image Toggle Public image subsection 3.1 Relationship with the African-American community 3.2 Sex symbol 4 Legacy 5 Achievements 6 Discography 7 Filmography 8 See also 9 Explanatory notes 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Citations 10.2 General sources 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Elvis Presley 179 languages Aceh Afrikaans Alemannisch Anaraskiela nglisc Aragones Asturianu Avanee Aymar aru Azrbaycanca Ban-lam-gu Bikol Central Bislama Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Catala Cestina Cymraeg Dansk Davvisamegiella Deutsch Eesti Emilian e rumagnol Espanol Esperanto Estremenu Euskara Fiji Hindi Froyskt Francais Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gaidhlig Galego Goychi Konknni Hausa Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Islenska Italiano Jawa Kaby Kapampangan Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyol ayisyen Kriyol gwiyannen Kurdi Latina Latviesu Letzebuergesch Lietuviu Limburgs Livvinkarjala Lombard Magyar Malagasy Malti Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandes Nahuatl Nederlands Nedersaksies Norsk bokmal Norsk nynorsk Occitan Ozbekcha Papiamentu Patois Piemonteis Tok Pisin Polski Portugues Qaraqalpaqsha Qrmtatarca Romana Romani chib Runa Simi Gagana Samoa Sardu Scots Seeltersk Sesotho Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovencina Slovenscina Slunski srpski Srpskohrvatski Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog Taclhit tatarca Turkce Veneto Vepsan kel Tieng Viet Volapuk Winaray Yoruba Zazaki Zeeuws Zemaiteska Batak Mandailing Tolsi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia American singer and actor 19351977 For other uses see Elvis Presley disambiguation . Elvis and King of Rock and Roll redirect here. For other uses see Elvis disambiguation and King of Rock and Roll disambiguation . Elvis Presley A publicity photograph for the 1957 film Jailhouse Rock Born Elvis Aaron Presley a 1935-01-08 January 8 1935 Tupelo Mississippi U.S. Died August 16 1977 1977-08-16 aged 42 Memphis Tennessee U.S. Resting place Graceland Memphis 35246N 90123W 35.04611N 90.02306W 35.04611; -90.02306 Other names King of Rock and Roll Occupations Singer actor Works Albums singles songs recorded film and television Spouse Priscilla Beaulieu m. 1967; div. 1973 Children Lisa Marie Presley Relatives Riley Keough granddaughter Brandon Presley second cousin Harold Ray Presley first cousin once removed Musical career Genres Rock and roll pop rockabilly country gospel RB blues Instruments Vocals guitar piano Years active 19531977 Labels Sun RCA Victor HMV Allied Artists Music Group Musical artist Military service 1 Allegiance United States Branch United States Army Years of service 19581960 Rank Sergeant Unit Headquarters Company 1st Medium Tank Battalion 32d Armor 3d Armored Division Awards Good Conduct Medal Signature Elvis Aaron Presley a January 8 1935 August 16 1977 known mononymously as Elvis was an American singer and actor. Known as the King of Rock and Roll he is regarded as one of the most significant cultural figures of the 20th century . Presleys energized performances and interpretations of songs and sexually provocative dance moves combined with a singularly potent mix of influences across color lines during a transformative era in race relations brought both great success and initial controversy . Presley was born in Tupelo Mississippi ; his family relocated to Memphis Tennessee when he was 13. His music career began there in 1954 at Sun Records with producer Sam Phillips who wanted to bring the sound of African-American music to a wider audience. Presley on guitar and accompanied by lead guitarist Scotty Moore and bassist Bill Black was a pioneer of rockabilly an uptempo backbeat -driven fusion of country music and rhythm and blues . In 1955 drummer D. J. Fontana joined to complete the lineup of Presleys classic quartet and RCA Victor acquired his contract in a deal arranged by Colonel Tom Parker who managed him for the rest of his career. Presleys first RCA Victor single Heartbreak Hotel was released in January 1956 and became a number-one hit in the US. Within a year RCA Victor would sell ten million Presley singles. With a series of successful television appearances and chart-topping records Presley became the leading figure of the newly popular rock and roll ; though his performative style and promotion of the then-marginalized sound of African Americans 6 led to him being widely considered a threat to the moral well-being of white American youth. 7 In November 1956 Presley made his film debut in Love Me Tender . Drafted into military service in 1958 he relaunched his recording career two years later with some of his most commercially successful work. Presley held few concerts however and guided by Parker proceeded to devote much of the 1960s to making Hollywood films and soundtrack albums most of them critically derided. Some of Presleys most famous films included Jailhouse Rock 1957 Blue Hawaii 1961 and Viva Las Vegas 1964. In 1968 he returned to the stage in the acclaimed NBC television comeback special Elvis which led to an extended Las Vegas concert residency and a string of highly profitable tours. In 1973 Presley gave the first concert by a solo artist to be broadcast around the world Aloha from Hawaii . However years of prescription drug abuse and unhealthy eating severely compromised his health and Presley died unexpectedly in August 1977 at his Graceland estate at the age of 42. Presley is one of the best-selling music artists of all time with sales estimated around 500 million records worldwide. b He was commercially successful in many genres including pop country rockabilly rhythm and blues adult contemporary and gospel . He won three Grammy Awards received the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award at age 36 and has been inducted into multiple music halls of fame . He holds several records including the most RIAA -certified gold and platinum albums the most albums charted on the Billboard 200 the most number-one albums by a solo artist on the UK Albums Chart and the most number-one singles by any act on the UK Singles Chart . In 2018 Presley was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom . Life and career 19351953: early years Main article: Early life of Elvis Presley Presleys birthplace in Tupelo Mississippi Presleys parents Elvis Aaron Presley was born on January 8 1935 in Tupelo Mississippi to Gladys Love nee Smith and Vernon Presley. 8 9 Elvis twin Jesse Garon was delivered 35 minutes before stillborn . 10 Presley became close to both parents especially his mother. The family attended an Assembly of God church where he found his initial musical inspiration. 11 Vernon moved from one odd job to the next 12 13 and the family often relied on neighbors and government food assistance. In 1938 they lost their home after Vernon was found guilty of altering a check and was jailed for eight months. 11 In September 1941 Presley entered first grade at East Tupelo Consolidated where his teachers regarded him as average . 14 His first public performance was a singing contest at the MississippiAlabama Fair and Dairy Show on October 3 1945 when he was 10; he sang Old Shep and recalled placing fifth. 15 A few months later Presley received his first guitar for his birthday; 16 17 he received guitar lessons from two uncles and a pastor at the familys church. Presley recalled I took the guitar and I watched people and I learned to play a little bit. But I would never sing in public. I was very shy about it. 18 In September 1946 Presley entered a new school Milam for sixth grade. The following year he began singing and playing his guitar at school. He was often teased as a trashy kid who played hillbilly music . 19 Presley was a devotee of Mississippi Slim s radio show. He was described as crazy about music by Slims younger brother one of Presleys classmates. Slim showed Presley chord techniques. 20 When his protege was 12 Slim scheduled him for two on-air performances. Presley was overcome by stage fright the first time but performed the following week. 21 In November 1948 the family moved to Memphis Tennessee . 22 Enrolled at L. C. Humes High School Presley received a C in music in eighth grade. When his music teacher said he had no aptitude for singing he brought in his guitar and sang a recent hit Keep Them Cold Icy Fingers Off Me . 23 He was usually too shy to perform openly and was occasionally bullied by classmates for being a mamas boy . 24 In 1950 Presley began practicing guitar under the tutelage of Lee Denson a neighbor. They and three other boys including two future rockabilly pioneers brothers Dorsey and Johnny Burnette formed a loose musical collective. 25 During his junior year Presley began to stand out among his classmates largely because of his appearance: he grew his sideburns and styled his hair. He would head down to Beale Street the heart of Memphis thriving blues scene and admire the wild flashy clothes at Lansky Brothers . By his senior year he was wearing those clothes. 26 He competed in Humes Annual Minstrel Show in 1953 singing and playing Till I Waltz Again with You a recent hit for Teresa Brewer . Presley recalled that the performance did much for his reputation: I wasnt popular in school ... I failed musiconly thing I ever failed. And then they entered me in this talent show ... when I came onstage I heard people kind of rumbling and whispering and so forth cause nobody knew I even sang. It was amazing how popular I became in school after that. 27 Presley who could not read music played by ear and frequented record stores that provided jukeboxes and listening booths. He knew all of Hank Snow s songs 28 and he loved records by other country singers such as Roy Acuff Ernest Tubb Ted Daffan Jimmie Rodgers Jimmie Davis and Bob Wills . 29 The Southern gospel singer Jake Hess one of his favorite performers was a significant influence on his ballad -singing style. 30 31 Presley was a regular audience member at the monthly All-Night Singings downtown where many of the white gospel groups that performed reflected the influence of African American spirituals . 32 Presley listened to regional radio stations such as WDIA that played what were then called race records : spirituals blues and the modern backbeat -heavy rhythm and blues . 33 Like some of his peers he may have attended blues venues only on nights designated for exclusively white audiences . 34 Many of his future recordings were inspired by local African-American musicians such as Arthur Crudup and Rufus Thomas . 35 36 B.B. King recalled that he had known Presley before he was popular when they both used to frequent Beale Street. 37 By the time he graduated high school in June 1953 Presley had singled out music as his future. 38 39 19531956: first recordings Sam Phillips and Sun Records See also: List of songs recorded by Elvis Presley on the Sun label Presley in a Sun Records promotional photograph 1954 In August 1953 Presley checked into Memphis Recording Service the company run by Sam Phillips before he started Sun Records . He aimed to pay for studio time to record a two-sided acetate disc : My Happiness and Thats When Your Heartaches Begin . He later claimed that he intended the record as a birthday gift for his mother or that he was merely interested in what he sounded like . Biographer Peter Guralnick argued that Presley chose Sun in the hope of being discovered. 40 In January 1954 Presley cut a second acetate at Sun Ill Never Stand in Your Way and It Wouldnt Be the Same Without You but again nothing came of it. 41 Not long after he failed an audition for a local vocal quartet the Songfellows 42 and another for the band of Eddie Bond . 43 Thats All Right Presley transformed not only the sound but the emotion of the song turning what had been written as a lament for a lost love into a satisfied declaration of independence. 44 Problems playing this file? See media help . Phillips meanwhile was always on the lookout for someone who could bring to a broader audience the sound of the black musicians on whom Sun focused. 45 In June he acquired a demo recording by Jimmy Sweeney of a ballad Without You that he thought might suit Presley. The teenaged singer came by the studio but was unable to do it justice. Despite this Phillips asked Presley to sing other numbers and was sufficiently affected by what he heard to invite two local musicians guitarist Winfield Scotty Moore and upright bass player Bill Black to work with Presley for a recording session. 46 The session held the evening of July 5 proved entirely unfruitful until late in the night. As they were about to abort and go home Presley launched into a 1946 blues number Arthur Crudups Thats All Right . Moore recalled All of a sudden Elvis just started singing this song jumping around and acting the fool and then Bill picked up his bass and he started acting the fool too and I started playing with them. Phillips quickly began taping; this was the sound he had been looking for. 47 Three days later popular Memphis disc jockey Dewey Phillips no relation to Sam Phillips played Thats All Right on his Red Hot and Blue show. 48 Listener interest was such that Phillips played the record repeatedly during the remaining two hours of his show. Interviewing Presley on-air Phillips asked him what high school he attended to clarify his color for the many callers who had assumed that he was black. 49 During the next few days the trio recorded a bluegrass song Bill Monroe s Blue Moon of Kentucky again in a distinctive style and employing a jury-rigged echo effect that Sam Phillips dubbed slapback . A single was pressed with Thats All Right on the A-side and Blue Moon of Kentucky on the reverse. 50 Early live performances and RCA Victor contract The trio played publicly for the first time at the Bon Air club on July 17 1954. 51 Later that month they appeared at the Overton Park Shell with Slim Whitman headlining. Here Elvis pioneered Rubber Legs his signature dance movement. 52 53 A combination of his strong response to rhythm and nervousness led Presley to shake his legs as he performed: His wide-cut pants emphasized his movements causing young women in the audience to start screaming. 54 Moore recalled During the instrumental parts he would back off from the mic and be playing and shaking and the crowd would just go wild. 55 Soon after Moore and Black left their old band to play with Presley regularly and disc jockeypromoter Bob Neal became the trios manager. From August through October they played frequently at the Eagles Nest club a dance venue in Memphis. When Presley played teenagers rushed from the pool to fill the club then left again as the house western swing band resumed. 56 Presley quickly grew more confident on stage. According to Moore His movement was a natural thing but he was also very conscious of what got a reaction. Hed do something one time and then he would expand on it real quick. 57 Amid these live performances Presley returned to Sun studio for more recording sessions. 58 Presley made what would be his only appearance on Nashville s Grand Ole Opry on October 2; Opry manager Jim Denny told Phillips that his singer was not bad but did not suit the program. 59 60 Louisiana Hayride radio commercial and first television performances In November 1954 Presley performed on Louisiana Hayride the Opry s chief and more adventurous rival. The show was broadcast to 198 radio stations in 28 states. His nervous first set drew a muted reaction. A more composed and energetic second set inspired an enthusiastic response. 61 Soon after the show the Hayride engaged Presley for a years worth of Saturday-night appearances. Trading in his old guitar for 8 he purchased a Martin instrument for 175 equivalent to 2 000 in 2023 and his trio began playing in new locales including Houston Texas and Texarkana Arkansas. 62 Presley made his first television appearance on the KSLA-TV broadcast of Louisiana Hayride . Soon after he failed an audition for Arthur Godfreys Talent Scouts on the CBS television network. By early 1955 Presleys regular Hayride appearances constant touring and well-received record releases had made him a regional star. 63 64 Presley performing with Scotty Moore and Bill Black in 1956 In January Neal signed a formal management contract with Presley and brought him to the attention of Colonel Tom Parker whom he considered the best promoter in the music business. Having successfully managed the top country star Eddy Arnold Parker was working with the new number-one country singer Hank Snow . Parker booked Presley on Snows February tour. 63 64 By August Sun had released ten sides credited to Elvis Presley Scotty and Bill ; the latest recordings included a drummer. Some of the songs like Thats All Right were in what one Memphis journalist described as the RB idiom of negro field jazz ; others like Blue Moon of Kentucky were more in the country field but there was a curious blending of the two different musics in both . 65 This blend of styles made it difficult for Presleys music to find radio airplay. According to Neal many country-music disc jockeys would not play it because Presley sounded too much like a black artist and none of the RB stations would touch him because he sounded too much like a hillbilly . 66 The blend came to be known as rockabilly . At the time Presley was billed as The King of Western Bop The Hillbilly Cat and The Memphis Flash . 67 Presley renewed Neals management contract in August 1955 simultaneously appointing Parker as his special adviser. 68 The group maintained an extensive touring schedule. 69 Neal recalled It was almost frightening the reaction that came to Elvis from the teenaged boys. So many of them through some sort of jealousy would practically hate him. There were occasions in some towns in Texas when wed have to be sure to have a police guard because somebodyd always try to take a crack at him. 70 The trio became a quartet when Hayride drummer Fontana joined as a full member. In mid-October they played a few shows in support of Bill Haley whose Rock Around the Clock track had been a number-one hit the previous year. Haley observed that Presley had a natural feel for rhythm and advised him to sing fewer ballads. 71 At the Country Disc Jockey Convention in early November Presley was voted the years most promising male artist. 72 After three major labels made offers of up to 25 000 Parker and Phillips struck a deal with RCA Victor on November 21 to acquire Presleys Sun contract for an unprecedented 40 000. 73 c Presley aged 20 was legally still a minor so his father signed the contract. 74 Parker arranged with the owners of Hill Range Publishing Jean and Julian Aberbach to create two entities Elvis Presley Music and Gladys Music to handle all the new material recorded by Presley. Songwriters were obliged to forgo one-third of their customary royalties in exchange for having Presley perform their compositions. 75 d By December RCA had begun to heavily promote its new singer and before months end had reissued many of his Sun recordings. 78 19561958: commercial breakout and controversy First national TV appearances and debut album Billboard magazine advertisement March 10 1956 On January 10 1956 Presley made his first recordings for RCA Victor in Nashville. 79 Extending his by-now customary backup of Moore Black Fontana and Hayride pianist Floyd Cramer who had been performing at live club dates with PresleyRCA Victor enlisted guitarist Chet Atkins and three background singers including Gordon Stoker of the popular Jordanaires quartet. 80 The session produced the moody Heartbreak Hotel released as a single on January 27. 79 Parker brought Presley to national television booking him on CBSs Stage Show for six appearances over two months. The program produced in New York City was hosted on alternate weeks by big band leaders and brothers Tommy and Jimmy Dorsey . After his first appearance on January 28 Presley stayed in town to record at RCA Victors New York studio. The sessions yielded eight songs including a cover of Carl Perkins rockabilly anthem Blue Suede Shoes . In February Presleys I Forgot to Remember to Forget a Sun recording released the previous August reached the top of the Billboard country chart . 81 Neals contract was terminated and Parker became Presleys manager. 82 RCA Victor released Presleys self-titled debut album on March 23. Joined by five previously unreleased Sun recordings its seven recently recorded tracks included two country songs a bouncy pop tune and what would centrally define the evolving sound of rock and roll : Blue Suede Shoes an improvement over Perkins in almost every way according to critic Robert Hilburn and three RB numbers that had been part of Presleys stage repertoire covers of Little Richard Ray Charles and The Drifters . As described by Hilburn these were the most revealing of all. Unlike many white artists ... who watered down the gritty edges of the original RB versions of songs in the 50s Presley reshaped them. He not only injected the tunes with his own vocal character but also made guitar not piano the lead instrument in all three cases. 83 It became the first rock and roll album to top the Billboard chart a position it held for ten weeks. 79 While Presley was not an innovative guitarist like Moore or contemporary African American rockers Bo Diddley and Chuck Berry cultural historian Gilbert B. Rodman argued that the albums cover image of Elvis having the time of his life on stage with a guitar in his hands played a crucial role in positioning the guitar ... as the instrument that best captured the style and spirit of this new music. 84 Milton Berle Show and Hound Dog Presley signing autographs in Minneapolis in 1956 On April 3 Presley made the first of two appearances on NBC s The Milton Berle Show . His performance on the deck of the USS Hancock in San Diego California prompted cheers and screams from an audience of sailors and their dates. 85 A few days later Presley and his band were flying to Nashville Tennessee for a recording session when an engine died and the plane almost went down over Arkansas . 86 Twelve weeks after its original release Heartbreak Hotel became Presleys first number-one pop hit. In late April Presley began a two-week residency at the New Frontier Hotel and Casino on the Las Vegas Strip . 87 The shows were poorly received by the conservative middle-aged hotel guests like a jug of corn liquor at a champagne party a Newsweek critic wrote. 88 Amid his Vegas tenure Presley who had acting ambitions signed a seven-year contract with Paramount Pictures . 89 He began a tour of the Midwest in mid-May covering fifteen cities in as many days. 90 He had attended several shows by Freddie Bell and the Bellboys in Vegas and was struck by their cover of Hound Dog a hit in 1953 for blues singer Big Mama Thornton by songwriters Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller . It became his new closing number. 91 After a show in La Crosse Wisconsin an urgent message on the letterhead of the local Catholic dioceses newspaper was sent to FBI director J. Edgar Hoover . It warned that Presley is a definite danger to the security of the United States. ... His actions and motions were such as to rouse the sexual passions of teenaged youth. ... After the show more than 1 000 teenagers tried to gang into Presleys room at the auditorium. ... Indications of the harm Presley did just in La Crosse were the two high school girls ... whose abdomen and thigh had Presleys autograph. 92 Presleys second Milton Berle Show appearance came on June 5 at NBC s Hollywood studio amid another hectic tour. Milton Berle persuaded Presley to leave his guitar backstage. 93 During the performance Presley abruptly halted an up-tempo rendition of Hound Dog and launched into a slow grinding version accentuated with exaggerated body movements. 93 His gyrations created a storm of controversy. 94 Jack Gould of The New York Times wrote Mr. Presley has no discernible singing ability. ... His phrasing if it can be called that consists of the stereotyped variations that go with a beginners aria in a bathtub. ... His one specialty is an accented movement of the body ... primarily identified with the repertoire of the blond bombshells of the burlesque runway. 95 Ben Gross of the New York Daily News opined that popular music has reached its lowest depths in the grunt and groin antics of one Elvis Presley. ... Elvis who rotates his pelvis ... gave an exhibition that was suggestive and vulgar tinged with the kind of animalism that should be confined to dives and bordellos . 96 Ed Sullivan whose variety show was the nations most popular declared Presley unfit for family viewing . 97 To Presleys displeasure he soon found himself being referred to as Elvis the Pelvis which he called childish . 98 Steve Allen Show and first Sullivan appearance Ed Sullivan and Presley during rehearsals for his second appearance on The Ed Sullivan Show October 26 1956 The Berle shows drew such high ratings that Presley was booked for a July 1 appearance on NBCs The Steve Allen Show in New York. Allen no fan of rock and roll introduced a new Elvis in a white bowtie and black tails. Presley sang Hound Dog for less than a minute to a basset hound wearing a top hat and bowtie. As described by television historian Jake Austen Allen thought Presley was talentless and absurd ... he set things up so that Presley would show his contrition . 99 Allen later wrote that he found Presleys strange gangly country-boy charisma his hard-to-define cuteness and his charming eccentricity intriguing and worked him into the comedy fabric of his program. 100 Just before the final rehearsal for the show Presley told a reporter I dont want to do anything to make people dislike me. I think TV is important so Im going to go along but I wont be able to give the kind of show I do in a personal appearance. 101 Presley would refer back to the Allen show as the most ridiculous performance of his career. 102 Later that night he appeared on Hy Gardner Calling a popular local television show. Pressed on whether he had learned anything from the criticism of him Presley responded No I havent... I dont see how any type of music would have any bad influence on people when its only music. ... how would rock n roll music make anyone rebel against their parents? 96 The next day Presley recorded Hound Dog Any Way You Want Me and Dont Be Cruel . The Jordanaires sang harmony as they had on The Steve Allen Show ; they would work with Presley through the 1960s. A few days later Presley made an outdoor concert appearance in Memphis at which he announced You know those people in New York are not gonna change me none. Im gonna show you what the real Elvis is like tonight. 103 In August a judge in Jacksonville Florida ordered Presley to tame his act. Throughout the following performance he largely kept still except for wiggling his little finger suggestively in mockery of the order. 104 The single pairing Dont Be Cruel with Hound Dog ruled the top of the charts for eleven weeksa mark that would not be surpassed for thirty-six years. 105 Recording sessions for Presleys second album took place in Hollywood in early September. Leiber and Stoller the writers of Hound Dog contributed Love Me . 106 Allens show with Presley had for the first time beaten The Ed Sullivan Show in the ratings. Sullivan booked Presley for three appearances for an unprecedented 50 000. 107 The first on September 9 1956 was seen by approximately 60 million viewersa record 82.6 percent of the television audience. 108 Actor Charles Laughton hosted the show filling in while Sullivan was recovering from a car accident. 97 According to legend Presley was shot only from the waist up. Watching clips of the Allen and Berle shows Sullivan had opined that Presley got some kind of device hanging down below the crotch of his pantsso when he moves his legs back and forth you can see the outline of his cock. ... I think its a Coke bottle. ... We just cant have this on a Sunday night. This is a family show! 109 Sullivan publicly told TV Guide As for his gyrations the whole thing can be controlled with camera shots. 107 In fact Presley was shown head-to-toe. Though the camerawork was relatively discreet during his debut with leg-concealing closeups when he danced the studio audience reacted with screams. 110 111 Presleys performance of his forthcoming single the ballad Love Me Tender prompted a record-shattering million advance orders. 112 More than any other single event it was this first appearance on The Ed Sullivan Show that made Presley a national celebrity. 97 Accompanying Presleys rise to fame a cultural shift was taking place that he both helped inspire and came to symbolize. The historian Marty Jezer wrote that Presley began the biggest pop craze since Glenn Miller and Frank Sinatra and brought rock and roll to mainstream culture: As Presley set the artistic pace other artists followed. ... Presley more than anyone else gave the young a belief in themselves as a distinct and somehow unified generationthe first in America ever to feel the power of an integrated youth culture. 113 Crazed crowds and film debut Presley performing live at the Mississippi-Alabama Fairgrounds in Tupelo September 26 1956 The audience response at Presleys live shows became increasingly fevered. Moore recalled Hed start out You aint nothin but a Hound Dog and theyd just go to pieces. Theyd always react the same way. Thered be a riot every time. 114 At the two concerts he performed in September at the MississippiAlabama Fair and Dairy Show fifty National Guardsmen were added to the police detail to prevent a ruckus. 115 Elvis Presleys second RCA Victor album was released in October and quickly rose to number one. The album includes Old Shep which he sang at the talent show in 1945 and which now marked the first time he played piano on an RCA Victor session. According to Guralnick the halting chords and the somewhat stumbling rhythm showed the unmistakable emotion and the equally unmistakable valuing of emotion over technique. 116 Assessing the musical and cultural impact of Presleys recordings from Thats All Right through Elvis rock critic Dave Marsh wrote that these records more than any others contain the seeds of what rock roll was has been and most likely what it may foreseeably become. 117 Were gonna do a sad song ... Presleys definition of rock and roll included a sense of humorhere during his second Sullivan appearance he introduces one of his signature numbers. Problems playing this file? See media help . Presley returned to The Ed Sullivan Show hosted this time by its namesake on October 28. After the performance crowds in Nashville and St. Louis burned him in effigy . 97 His first motion picture Love Me Tender was released on November 21. Though he was not top-billed the films original title The Reno Brothers was changed to capitalize on his latest number-one record: Love Me Tender had hit the top of the charts earlier that month. To further take advantage of Presleys popularity four musical numbers were added to what was originally a straight acting role. The film was panned by critics but did very well at the box office. 89 Presley would receive top billing on every subsequent film he made. 118 On December 4 Presley dropped into Sun Records where Carl Perkins and Jerry Lee Lewis were recording and had an impromptu jam session along with Johnny Cash . Though Phillips no longer had the right to release any Presley material he made sure that the session was captured on tape. The results none officially released for twenty-five years became known as the Million Dollar Quartet recordings. 119 The year ended with a front-page story in The Wall Street Journal reporting that Presley merchandise had brought in 22 million on top of his record sales 120 and Billboard s declaration that he had placed more songs in the top 100 than any other artist since records were first charted. 121 In his first full year at RCA Victor then the record industrys largest company Presley had accounted for over fifty percent of the labels singles sales. 112 Leiber and Stoller collaboration and draft notice Presley made his third and final Ed Sullivan Show appearance on January 6 1957on this occasion indeed shot only down to the waist. Some commentators have claimed that Parker orchestrated an appearance of censorship to generate publicity. 111 122 In any event as critic Greil Marcus describes Presley did not tie himself down. Leaving behind the bland clothes he had worn on the first two shows he stepped out in the outlandish costume of a pasha if not a harem girl. From the make-up over his eyes the hair falling in his face the overwhelmingly sexual cast of his mouth he was playing Rudolph Valentino in The Sheik with all stops out. 97 To close displaying his range and defying Sullivans wishes Presley sang a gentle black spiritual Peace in the Valley . At the end of the show Sullivan declared Presley a real decent fine boy . 123 Two days later the Memphis draft board announced that Presley would be classified 1-A and would probably be drafted sometime that year. 124 Each of the three Presley singles released in the first half of 1957 went to number one: Too Much All Shook Up and Let Me Be Your Teddy Bear . Already an international star he was attracting fans even where his music was not officially released: The New York Times reported that pressings of his music on discarded X-ray plates were commanding high prices in Leningrad . 125 Presley purchased his 18-room mansion Graceland on March 19 1957. 126 Before the purchase Elvis recorded Loving You the soundtrack to his second film which was released in July. It was his third straight number-one album. The title track was written by Leiber and Stoller who were then retained to write four of the six songs recorded at the sessions for Jailhouse Rock Presleys next film. The songwriting team effectively produced the Jailhouse sessions and developed a close working relationship with Presley who came to regard them as his good-luck charm . 127 He was fast said Leiber. Any demo you gave him he knew by heart in ten minutes. 128 The title track became another number-one hit as was the Jailhouse Rock EP . 129 Presley and costar Judy Tyler in the trailer for Jailhouse Rock released in October 1957 Presley undertook three brief tours during the year continuing to generate a crazed audience response. 130 A Detroit newspaper suggested that the trouble with going to see Elvis Presley is that youre liable to get killed . 131 Villanova students pelted the singer with eggs in Philadelphia 131 and in Vancouver the crowd rioted after the show ended destroying the stage. 132 Frank Sinatra who had inspired the swooning and screaming of teenage girls in the 1940s decried rock and roll as brutal ugly degenerate vicious. ... It fosters almost totally negative and destructive reactions in young people. It smells phoney and false. It is sung played and written for the most part by cretinous goons. ... This rancid-smelling aphrodisiac I deplore. 133 Asked for a response Presley said: I admire the man. He has a right to say what he wants to say. He is a great success and a fine actor but I think he shouldnt have said it. ... This is a trend just the same as he faced when he started years ago. 134 Leiber and Stoller were again in the studio for the recording of Elvis Christmas Album . Toward the end of the session they wrote a song on the spot at Presleys request: Santa Claus Is Back in Town an innuendo -laden blues. 135 The holiday release stretched Presleys string of number-one albums to four and would become the best-selling Christmas album ever in the United States 136 137 with eventual sales of over 20 million worldwide. 138 After the session Moore and Blackdrawing only modest weekly salaries sharing in none of Presleys massive financial successresigned though they were brought back on a per diem basis a few weeks later. 139 On December 20 Presley received his draft notice though he was granted a deferment to finish the forthcoming film King Creole . A couple of weeks into the new year Dont another Leiber and Stoller tune became Presleys tenth number-one seller. Recording sessions for the King Creole soundtrack were held in Hollywood in mid-January 1958. Leiber and Stoller provided three songs but it would be the last time Presley and the duo worked closely together. 140 As Stoller later recalled Presleys manager and entourage sought to wall him off. 141 A brief soundtrack session on February 11 marked the final occasion on which Black was to perform with Presley. 142 19581960: military service and mothers death Main article: Military career of Elvis Presley Presley being sworn in to the Army on March 24 1958 at Fort Chaffee On March 24 1958 Presley was drafted into the United States Army at Fort Chaffee in Arkansas. His arrival was a major media event. Hundreds of people descended on Presley as he stepped from the bus; photographers accompanied him into the installation. 143 Presley announced that he was looking forward to his military service saying that he did not want to be treated any differently from anyone else. 144 Between March 28 and September 17 1958 Presley completed basic and advanced training at Fort Hood Texas where he was temporarily assigned to Company A 2d Medium Tank Battalion 37th Armor . During the two weeks leave between his basic and advanced training in early June he recorded five songs in Nashville. 145 In early August Presleys mother was diagnosed with hepatitis and her condition rapidly worsened. Presley was granted emergency leave to visit her and arrived in Memphis on August 12. Two days later she died of heart failure at age 46. Presley was devastated and never the same; 146 147 their relationship had remained extremely closeeven into his adulthood they would use baby talk with each other and Presley would address her with pet names. 4 Presley wearing the 3d Armored Division Shoulder Sleeve Insignia poses atop a tank at Ray Barracks On October 1 1958 Presley was assigned to the 1st Medium Tank Battalion 32d Armor 3d Armored Division at Ray Barracks West Germany where he served as an armor intelligence specialist. 1 On November 27 he was promoted to private first class and on June 1 1959 to specialist fourth class . While on maneuvers Presley was introduced to amphetamines and became practically evangelical about their benefits not only for energy but for strength and weight loss. 148 Karate became a lifelong interest: he studied with Jurgen Seydel 149 150 and later included it in his live performances. 151 152 153 Fellow soldiers have attested to Presleys wish to be seen as an able ordinary soldier despite his fame and to his generosity. He donated his Army pay to charity purchased television sets for the base and bought an extra set of fatigues for everyone in his outfit. 154 Presley was promoted to sergeant on February 11 1960. 1 While in Bad Nauheim Presley aged 24 met 14-year-old Priscilla Beaulieu . 155 They would marry after a seven-and-a-half-year courtship. In her autobiography Priscilla said that Presley was concerned that his 24 months in the military would ruin his career. In Special Services he would have been able to perform and remain in touch with the public but Parker had convinced him that to gain popular respect he should serve as a regular soldier. 156 Media reports echoed Presleys concerns about his career but RCA Victor producer Steve Sholes and Freddy Bienstock of Hill and Range had carefully prepared: armed with a substantial amount of unreleased material they kept up a regular stream of successful releases. 157 Between his induction and discharge Presley had ten top-40 hits including Wear My Ring Around Your Neck the bestselling Hard Headed Woman and One Night in 1958 and Now and Then Theres A Fool Such as I and the number-one A Big Hunk o Love in 1959. 158 RCA Victor also generated four albums compiling previously issued material during this period most successfully Elvis Golden Records 1958 which hit number three on the LP chart. 159 19601968: focus on films See also: Elvis Presley on film and television Elvis Is Back Its Now or Never Presley broke new stylistic ground and displayed his vocal range with this number-one hit. The quasi-operatic ballad ends with Presley soaring up to an incredible top G sharp. 160 Problems playing this file? See media help . Presley returned to the U.S. on March 2 1960 and was honorably discharged three days later. 161 The train that carried him from New Jersey to Tennessee was mobbed all the way and Presley was called upon to appear at scheduled stops to please his fans. 162 On the night of March 20 he entered RCAs Nashville studio to cut tracks for a new album along with a single Stuck on You which was rushed into release and swiftly became a number-one hit. 163 Another Nashville session two weeks later yielded a pair of bestselling singles the ballads Its Now or Never and Are You Lonesome Tonight? along with the rest of Elvis Is Back! The album features several songs described by Greil Marcus as full of Chicago blues menace driven by Presleys own super-miked acoustic guitar brilliant playing by Scotty Moore and demonic sax work from Boots Randolph . Elvis singing wasnt sexy it was pornographic. 164 The record conjured up the vision of a performer who could be all things according to music historian John Robertson: a flirtatious teenage idol with a heart of gold; a tempestuous dangerous lover; a gutbucket blues singer; a sophisticated nightclub entertainer; a raucous rocker . 165 Released only days after recording was complete it reached number two on the album chart. 166 167 Presley with Juliet Prowse in G.I. Blues Presley returned to television on May 12 as a guest on The Frank Sinatra Timex Special . Also known as Welcome Home Elvis the show had been taped in late March the only time all year Presley performed in front of an audience. Parker secured an unheard-of 125 000 for eight minutes of singing. The broadcast drew an enormous viewership. 168 G.I. Blues the soundtrack to Presleys first film since his return was a number-one album in October. His first LP of sacred material His Hand in Mine followed two months later; it reached number 13 on the U.S. pop chart and number 3 in the United Kingdom remarkable figures for a gospel album. In February 1961 Presley performed two shows in Memphis for a benefit for twenty-four local charities. During a luncheon preceding the event RCA Victor presented him with a plaque certifying worldwide sales of over 75 million records. 169 A twelve-hour Nashville session in mid-March yielded nearly all of Presleys next studio album Something for Everybody . 170 According to John Robertson it exemplifies the Nashville sound the restrained cosmopolitan style that would define country music in the 1960s. Presaging much of what was to come from Presley over the next half-decade the album is largely a pleasant unthreatening pastiche of the music that had once been Elvis birthright . 171 It would be his sixth number-one LP. Another benefit concert for a Pearl Harbor memorial was staged on March 25 in Hawaii. It was to be Presleys last public performance for seven years. 172 Lost in Hollywood Parker had by now pushed Presley into a heavy filmmaking schedule focused on formulaic modestly budgeted musical comedies . Presley initially insisted on pursuing higher roles but when two films in a more dramatic vein Flaming Star 1960 and Wild in the Country 1961were less commercially successful he reverted to the formula. Among the twenty-seven films he made during the 1960s there were a few further exceptions. 173 His films were almost universally panned; critic Andrew Caine dismissed them as a pantheon of bad taste . 174 Nonetheless they were virtually all profitable. Hal Wallis who produced nine declared A Presley picture is the only sure thing in Hollywood. 175 Of Presleys films in the 1960s fifteen were accompanied by soundtrack albums and another five by soundtrack EPs. The films rapid production and release schedulesPresley frequently starred in three a yearaffected his music. According to Jerry Leiber the soundtrack formula was already evident before Presley left for the Army: three ballads one medium-tempo number one up-tempo and one break blues boogie . 176 As the decade wore on the quality of the soundtrack songs grew progressively worse . 177 Julie Parrish who appeared in Paradise Hawaiian Style 1966 says that Presley disliked many of the songs. 178 The Jordanaires Gordon Stoker describes how he would retreat from the studio microphone: The material was so bad that he felt like he couldnt sing it. 179 Most of the film albums featured a song or two from respected writers such as the team of Doc Pomus and Mort Shuman . But by and large according to biographer Jerry Hopkins the numbers seemed to be written on order by men who never really understood Elvis or rock and roll . 180 Presley and his wife Priscilla Presley holding their newborn daughter Lisa Marie Presley in 1968 In the first half of the decade three of Presleys soundtrack albums were ranked number one on the pop charts and a few of his most popular songs came from his films such as Cant Help Falling in Love 1961 and Return to Sender 1962. However the commercial returns steadily diminished. From 1964 through 1968 Presley had only one top-ten hit: Crying in the Chapel 1965 a gospel number recorded in 1960. As for non-film albums between the June 1962 release of Pot Luck and the November 1968 release of the soundtrack to the television special that signaled his comeback only one LP of new material by Presley was issued: the gospel album How Great Thou Art 1967. It won him his first Grammy Award for Best Sacred Performance. As Marsh described Presley was arguably the greatest white gospel singer of his time and really the last rock roll artist to make gospel as vital a component of his musical personality as his secular songs . 181 Shortly before Christmas 1966 more than seven years since they first met Presley proposed to Priscilla Beaulieu. They were married on May 1 1967 in a brief ceremony in their suite at the Aladdin Hotel in Las Vegas. 182 The flow of formulaic films and assembly-line soundtracks continued. It was not until October 1967 when the Clambake soundtrack LP registered record low sales for a new Presley album that RCA Victor executives recognized a problem. By then of course the damage had been done as historians Connie Kirchberg and Marc Hendrickx put it. Elvis was viewed as a joke by serious music lovers and a has-been to all but his most loyal fans. 183 19681973: Comeback Elvis : the 68 Comeback Special Main article: Singer Presents...Elvis The 68 Comeback Special produced one of the most famous images of Presley; 184 taken on June 29 1968 it was adapted for the cover of Rolling Stone in July 1969 184 185 Presleys only child Lisa Marie was born on February 1 1968 during a period when he had grown deeply unhappy with his career. 186 Of the eight Presley singles released between January 1967 and May 1968 only two charted in the top 40 none higher than number 28. 187 His forthcoming soundtrack album Speedway would rank at number 82. Parker had already shifted his plans to television: he maneuvered a deal with NBC that committed the network to finance a theatrical feature and broadcast a Christmas special. 188 Recorded in late June in Burbank California the special simply called Elvis aired on December 3 1968. Later known as the 68 Comeback Special the show featured lavishly staged studio productions as well as songs performed with a band in front of a small audiencePresleys first live performances since 1961. The live segments saw Presley dressed in tight black leather singing and playing guitar in an uninhibited style reminiscent of his early rock and roll days. Director and co-producer Steve Binder worked hard to produce a show that was far from the hour of Christmas songs Parker had originally planned. 189 The show NBCs highest-rated that season captured forty-two percent of the total viewing audience. 190 Jon Landau of Eye magazine remarked: There is something magical about watching a man who has lost himself find his way back home. He sang with the kind of power people no longer expect of rock n roll singers. He moved his body with a lack of pretension and effort that must have made Jim Morrison green with envy. 191 Marsh calls the performance one of emotional grandeur and historical resonance . 192 By January 1969 the single If I Can Dream written for the special reached number 12. The soundtrack album rose into the top ten. According to friend Jerry Schilling the special reminded Presley of what he had not been able to do for years being able to choose the people; being able to choose what songs and not being told what had to be on the soundtrack. ... He was out of prison man. 190 Binder said of Presleys reaction I played Elvis the 60-minute show and he told me in the screening room Steve its the greatest thing Ive ever done in my life. I give you my word I will never sing a song I dont believe in. 190 From Elvis in Memphis and the International Power of My Love Beginning with his American Sound recordings soul music became a central element in Presleys fusion of styles. Here he revels in lyrics full of sexual innuendos. 193 Problems playing this file? See media help . Buoyed by the experience of the Comeback Special Presley engaged in a prolific series of recording sessions at American Sound Studio which led to the acclaimed From Elvis in Memphis . Released in June 1969 it was his first secular non-soundtrack album from a dedicated period in the studio in eight years. As described by Marsh it is a masterpiece in which Presley immediately catches up with pop music trends that had seemed to pass him by during the movie years. He sings country songs soul songs and rockers with real conviction a stunning achievement. 194 The album featured the hit single In the Ghetto issued in April which reached number three on the pop chartPresleys first non-gospel top ten hit since Bossa Nova Baby in 1963. Further hit singles were culled from the American Sound sessions: Suspicious Minds Dont Cry Daddy and Kentucky Rain . 195 Presley was keen to resume regular live performing. Following the success of the Comeback Special offers came in from around the world. The London Palladium offered Parker US 28 000 equivalent to 233 000 in 2023 for a one-week engagement. He responded Thats fine for me now how much can you get for Elvis? 196 In May the brand-new International Hotel in Las Vegas boasting the largest showroom in the city booked Presley for fifty-seven shows over four weeks beginning July 31. Moore Fontana and the Jordanaires declined to participate afraid of losing the lucrative session work they had in Nashville. Presley assembled new top-notch accompaniment led by guitarist James Burton and including two gospel groups The Imperials and Sweet Inspirations . 197 Costume designer Bill Belew responsible for the intense leather styling of the Comeback Special created a new stage look for Presley inspired by his passion for karate. 198 Nonetheless Presley was nervous: his only previous Las Vegas engagement in 1956 had been dismal. Parker oversaw a major promotional push and International Hotel owner Kirk Kerkorian arranged to send his own plane to New York to fly in rock journalists for the debut performance. 199 Presley took to the stage without introduction. The audience of 2 200 including many celebrities gave him a standing ovation before he sang a note and another after his performance. A third followed his encore Cant Help Falling in Love which would be his closing number for much of his remaining life. 200 At a press conference after the show when a journalist referred to him as The King Presley gestured toward Fats Domino who was taking in the scene. No Presley said thats the real king of rock and roll. 201 The next day Parkers negotiations with the hotel resulted in a five-year contract for Presley to play each February and August at an annual salary of 1 million. 202 Newsweek commented There are several unbelievable things about Elvis but the most incredible is his staying power in a world where meteoric careers fade like shooting stars. 203 Rolling Stone called Presley supernatural his own resurrection. 204 In November Presleys final non-concert film Change of Habit opened. The double album From Memphis to VegasFrom Vegas to Memphis came out the same month; the first LP consisted of live performances from the International the second of more cuts from the American Sound sessions. Suspicious Minds reached the top of the chartsPresleys first U.S. pop number-one in over seven years and his last. 205 Cassandra Peterson later televisions Elvira met Presley during this period in Las Vegas. She recalled of their encounter He was so anti-drug when I met him. I mentioned to him that I smoked marijuana and he was just appalled. 206 Presley also rarely drankseveral of his family members had been alcoholics a fate he intended to avoid. 207 Back on tour and meeting Nixon Presley returned to the International early in 1970 for the first of the years two-month-long engagements performing two shows a night. Recordings from these shows were issued on the album On Stage . 208 In late February Presley performed six attendance-recordbreaking shows at the Houston Astrodome . 209 In April the single The Wonder of You was issueda number one hit in the UK it topped the U.S. adult contemporary chart as well. Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer MGM filmed rehearsal and concert footage at the International during August for the documentary Elvis: Thats the Way It Is . Presley was performing in a jumpsuit which would become a trademark of his live act. During this engagement he was threatened with murder unless US 50 000 equivalent to 392 000 in 2023 was paid. Presley had been the target of many threats since the 1950s often without his knowledge. 210 The FBI took the threat seriously and security was increased for the next two shows. Presley went onstage with a Derringer in his right boot and a .45 caliber pistol in his waistband but the concerts succeeded without any incidents. 211 212 Thats the Way It Is produced to accompany the documentary and featuring both studio and live recordings marked a stylistic shift. As music historian John Robertson noted The authority of Presleys singing helped disguise the fact that the album stepped decisively away from the American-roots inspiration of the Memphis sessions towards a more middle-of-the-road sound. With country put on the back burner and soul and RB left in Memphis what was left was very classy very clean white popperfect for the Las Vegas crowd but a definite retrograde step for Elvis. 213 After the end of his International engagement on September 7 Presley embarked on a week-long concert tour largely of the South his first since 1958. Another week-long tour of the West Coast followed in November. 214 Presley meets US President Richard Nixon in the White House Oval Office December 21 1970 On December 21 1970 Presley engineered a meeting with U.S. President Richard Nixon at the White House where he explained how he believed he could reach out to the hippies to help combat the drug culture he and the president abhorred. He asked Nixon for a Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous Drugs badge to signify official sanction of his efforts. Nixon who apparently found the encounter awkward expressed a belief that Presley could send a positive message to young people and that it was therefore important that he retain his credibility . 215 Presley told Nixon that the Beatles whose songs he regularly performed in concert during the era 216 exemplified what he saw as a trend of anti-Americanism . 217 Presley and his friends previously had a four-hour get-together with the Beatles at his home in Bel Air California in August 1965. Paul McCartney later said that he felt a bit betrayed. ... The great joke was that we were taking illegal drugs and look what happened to him a reference to Presleys early death linked to prescription drug abuse . 218 The U.S. Junior Chamber of Commerce named Presley one of its annual Ten Most Outstanding Young Men of the Nation on January 16 1971. 219 Not long after the City of Memphis named the stretch of Highway 51 South on which Graceland is located Elvis Presley Boulevard . The same year Presley became the first rock and roll singer to be awarded the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award then known as the Bing Crosby Award. 220 221 Three new non-film Presley studio albums were released in 1971. Best received by critics was Elvis Country a concept record that focused on genre standards. 222 The biggest seller was Elvis Sings The Wonderful World of Christmas . According to Greil Marcus In the midst of ten painfully genteel Christmas songs every one sung with appalling sincerity and humility one could find Elvis tom-catting his way through six blazing minutes of Merry Christmas Baby a raunchy old Charles Brown blues. ... If Presleys sin was his lifelessness it was his sinfulness that brought him to life. 223 Marriage breakdown and Aloha from Hawaii See also: Aloha from Hawaii via Satellite Presley center with friends Bill Porter left and Paul Anka right backstage at the Las Vegas Hilton on August 5 1972 MGM filmed Presley in April 1972 for Elvis on Tour which went on to win the Golden Globe Award for Best Documentary Film for that years Golden Globe Awards . His gospel album He Touched Me released that month would earn him his second Grammy Award for Best Inspirational Performance . A fourteen-date tour commenced with an unprecedented four consecutive sold-out shows at New Yorks Madison Square Garden . 224 The evening concert on July 10 was issued in LP form a week later. Elvis: As Recorded at Madison Square Garden became one of Presleys biggest-selling albums. After the tour the single Burning Love was releasedPresleys last top ten hit on the U.S. pop chart. The most exciting single Elvis has made since All Shook Up wrote rock critic Robert Christgau . 225 Elvis and Priscilla Presley after their divorce was finalized in 1973 Presley and his wife had become increasingly distant barely cohabiting. In 1971 an affair he had with Joyce Bova resultedunbeknownst to himin her pregnancy and an abortion. 226 He often raised the possibility of Joyce moving into Graceland. 227 The Presleys separated on February 23 1972 after Priscilla disclosed her relationship with Mike Stone a karate instructor Presley had recommended to her. Priscilla related that when she told him Presley forcefully made love to her declaring This is how a real man makes love to his woman . 228 She later stated in an interview that she regretted her choice of words in describing the incident and said it had been an overstatement. 229 Five months later Presleys new girlfriend Linda Thompson a songwriter and one-time Memphis beauty queen moved in with him. 230 Presley and his wife filed for divorce on August 18. 231 According to Joe Moscheo of the Imperials the failure of Presleys marriage was a blow from which he never recovered . 232 At a rare press conference that June a reporter had asked Presley whether he was satisfied with his image. Presley replied Well the image is one thing and the human being another ... its very hard to live up to an image. 233 Presley came up with his outfits eagle motif as something that would say America to the world 234 In January 1973 Presley performed two benefit concerts for the Kui Lee Cancer Fund in connection with a groundbreaking television special Aloha from Hawaii which would be the first concert by a solo artist to be aired globally. The first show served as a practice run and backup should technical problems affect the live broadcast two days later. On January 14 Aloha from Hawaii aired live via satellite to prime-time audiences in Japan South Korea Thailand the Philippines Australia and New Zealand as well as to U.S. servicemen based across Southeast Asia. In Japan where it capped a nationwide Elvis Presley Week it smashed viewing records. The next night it was simulcast to twenty-eight European countries and in April an extended version aired in the U.S. receiving a fifty-seven percent share of the TV audience. 235 Over time Parkers claim that it was seen by one billion or more people 236 would be broadly accepted 237 238 239 but that figure appeared to have been sheer invention. 240 241 Presleys stage costume became the most recognized example of the elaborate concert garb with which his latter-day persona became closely associated. As described by Bobbie Ann Mason At the end of the show when he spreads out his American Eagle cape with the full stretched wings of the eagle studded on the back he becomes a god figure. 242 The accompanying double album released in February went to number one and eventually sold over 5 million copies in the U.S. 243 It was Presleys last U.S. number-one pop album during his lifetime. 244 At a midnight show that same month four men rushed onto the stage in an apparent attack. Security personnel came to Presleys defense and he ejected one invader from the stage himself. Following the show Presley became obsessed with the idea that the men had been sent by Mike Stone to kill him. Though they were shown to have been only overexuberant fans Presley raged Theres too much pain in me ... Stone must die. His outbursts continued with such intensity that a physician was unable to calm him despite administering large doses of medication. After another two full days of raging Red West his friend and bodyguard felt compelled to get a price for a contract killing and was relieved when Presley decided Aw hell lets just leave it for now. Maybe its a bit heavy. 245 19731977: health deterioration and death Medical crises and last studio sessions Presleys divorce was finalized on October 9 1973. 246 By then his health was in serious decline. Twice during the year he overdosed on barbiturates spending three days in a coma in his hotel suite after the first incident. In late 1973 he was hospitalized from the effects of a pethidine addiction. According to his primary care physician George C. Nichopoulos Presley felt that by getting drugs from a doctor he wasnt the common everyday junkie getting something off the street . 247 Since his comeback he had staged more live shows with each passing year and 1973 saw 168 concerts his busiest schedule ever. 248 Despite his failing health he undertook another intensive touring schedule in 1974. 249 Presleys condition declined precipitously that September. Keyboardist Tony Brown remembered his arrival at a University of Maryland concert: He fell out of the limousine to his knees. People jumped to help and he pushed them away like Dont help me. He walked on stage and held onto the mic for the first thirty minutes like it was a post. Everybodys looking at each other like Is the tour gonna happen? 250 Guitarist John Wilkinson recalled: He was all gut. He was slurring. He was so fucked up. ... It was obvious he was drugged. It was obvious there was something terribly wrong with his body. It was so bad the words to the songs were barely intelligible. ... I remember crying. He could barely get through the introductions. 251 RCA began to grow anxious as his interest in the recording studio waned. After a session in December 1973 that produced eighteen songs enough for almost two albums Presley made no official studio recordings in 1974. 252 Parker delivered RCA another concert record Elvis Recorded Live on Stage in Memphis . 253 Recorded on March 20 it included a version of How Great Thou Art that won Presley his third and final Grammy Award for Best Inspirational Performance . 254 255 All three of his competitive Grammy wins out of fourteen total nominations were for gospel recordings. 255 Presley returned to the recording studio in March 1975 but Parkers attempts to arrange another session toward the end of the year were unsuccessful. 256 In 1976 RCA sent a mobile recording unit to Graceland that made possible two full-scale recording sessions. 257 However the recording process had become a struggle for him. 258 Final months Hurt An RB hit for Roy Hamilton in 1955 and a pop hit for blue-eyed soul singer Timi Yuro in 1961 Presleys deep soul version was picked up by country radio in 1976. 259 Problems playing this file? See media help . After Presleys relationship with Linda Thompson ended 260 he began dating Ginger Alden in November 1976; he proposed marriage to Alden two months later. 261 Journalist Tony Scherman wrote that by early 1977 Presley had become a grotesque caricature of his sleek energetic former self. Grossly overweight his mind dulled by the pharmacopia he daily ingested he was barely able to pull himself through his abbreviated concerts. 262 According to Andy Greene of Rolling Stone Presleys final performances were mostly sad sloppy affairs where a bloated drugged Presley struggled to remember his lyrics and get through the night without collapsing ... Most everything from the final three years of his life is sad and hard to watch. 263 In Alexandria Louisiana he was on stage for less than an hour and was impossible to understand . 264 On March 31 he canceled a performance in Baton Rouge unable to get out of his hotel bed; four shows had to be canceled and rescheduled. 265 Despite the accelerating deterioration of his health Presley fulfilled most of his touring commitments. According to Guralnick fans were becoming increasingly voluble about their disappointment but it all seemed to go right past Presley whose world was now confined almost entirely to his room and his spiritualism books . 266 Presleys cousin Billy Smith recalled how he would sit in his room and chat for hours sometimes recounting favorite Monty Python sketches and his past escapades but more often gripped by paranoid obsessions. 267 Way Down Presleys last single issued during his lifetime was released on June 6 1977. That month CBS taped two concerts for a television special Elvis in Concert to be broadcast in October. In the first shot in Omaha on June 19 Presleys voice Guralnick writes is almost unrecognizable a small childlike instrument in which he talks more than sings most of the songs casts about uncertainly for the melody in others and is virtually unable to articulate or project . 268 Two days later in Rapid City South Dakota he looked healthier seemed to have lost a little weight and sounded better too though by the conclusion of the performance his face was framed in a helmet of blue-black hair from which sweat sheets down over pale swollen cheeks . 268 Presleys final concert was held in Indianapolis at Market Square Arena on June 26 1977. 269 Death See also: Elvis sightings Presleys grave at Graceland On August 16 1977 Presley was scheduled on an evening flight out of Memphis to Portland Maine to begin another tour. That afternoon however his fiancee Ginger Alden discovered him unresponsive on the bathroom floor of his Graceland mansion. 270 Attempts to revive him failed and he was pronounced dead at Baptist Memorial Hospital at 3:30 p.m.; 271 he was 42. 272 President Jimmy Carter issued a statement that credited Presley with having permanently changed the face of American popular culture . 273 Thousands of people gathered outside Graceland to view the open casket. One of Presleys cousins Billy Mann accepted US 18 000 equivalent to 91 000 in 2023 to secretly photograph the body; the picture appeared on the cover of the National Enquirer s biggest-selling issue ever. 274 Alden struck a 105 000 equivalent to 528 000 in 2023 deal with the Enquirer for her story but settled for less when she broke her exclusivity agreement. 275 Presley left her nothing in his will . 276 Presleys funeral was held at Graceland on August 18. Outside the gates a car plowed into a group of fans killing two young women and critically injuring a third. 277 About 80 000 people lined the processional route to Forest Hill Cemetery where Presley was buried next to his mother. 278 Within a few weeks Way Down topped the country and UK singles chart. 279 280 Following an attempt to steal Presleys body in late August the remains of both Presley and his mother were exhumed and reburied in Gracelands Meditation Garden on October 2. 275 Cause of death While an autopsy undertaken the same day Presley died was still in progress Memphis medical examiner Jerry Francisco announced that the immediate cause of death was cardiac arrest and declared that drugs played no role in Presleys death . 281 In fact drug use was heavily implicated in Presleys death writes Guralnick. The pathologists conducting the autopsy thought it possible for instance that he had suffered anaphylactic shock brought on by the codeine pills he had gotten from his dentist to which he was known to have had a mild allergy . Lab reports filed two months later strongly suggested that polypharmacy was the primary cause of death; one reported fourteen drugs in Elvis system ten in significant quantity . 282 In 1979 forensic pathologist Cyril Wecht reviewed the reports and concluded that a combination of depressants had resulted in Presleys accidental death. 281 Forensic historian and pathologist Michael Baden viewed the situation as complicated: Elvis had an enlarged heart for a long time. That together with his drug habit caused his death. But he was difficult to diagnose; it was a judgment call. 283 The competence and ethics of two of the centrally involved medical professionals were seriously questioned. Francisco had offered a cause of death before the autopsy was complete; claimed the underlying ailment was cardiac arrhythmia a condition that can be determined only in a living person; and denied drugs played any part in Presleys death before the toxicology results were known. 281 Allegations of a cover-up were widespread. 283 While a 1981 trial of Presleys main physician George C. Nichopoulos exonerated him of criminal liability the facts were startling: In the first eight months of 1977 alone he had prescribed more than 10 000 doses of sedatives amphetamines and narcotics: all in Elvis name. Nichopoulos license was suspended for three months. It was permanently revoked in the 1990s after the Tennessee Medical Board brought new charges of over-prescription. 247 In 1994 the Presley autopsy report was reopened. Joseph Davis who had conducted thousands of autopsies as Miami-Dade County coroner 284 declared at its completion There is nothing in any of the data that supports a death from drugs. In fact everything points to a sudden violent heart attack. 247 More recent research has revealed that Francisco did not speak for the entire pathology team. Other staff could say nothing with confidence until they got the results back from the laboratories if then. 285 One of the examiners E. Eric Muirhead could not believe his ears. Francisco had not only presumed to speak for the hospitals team of pathologists he had announced a conclusion that they had not reached. ... Early on a meticulous dissection of the body ... confirmed that Elvis was chronically ill with diabetes glaucoma and constipation. As they proceeded the doctors saw evidence that his body had been wracked over a span of years by a large and constant stream of drugs. They had also studied his hospital records which included two admissions for drug detoxification and methadone treatments. 285 Later developments Between 1977 and 1981 six of Presleys posthumously released singles were top-ten country hits. 279 Graceland was opened to the public in 1982. Attracting over half a million visitors annually it became the second-most-visited home in the United States after the White House. 286 The residence was declared a National Historic Landmark in 2006. 287 Presley has been inducted into five music halls of fame : the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 1986 the Country Music Hall of Fame 1998 the Gospel Music Hall of Fame 2001 the Rockabilly Hall of Fame 2007 and the Memphis Music Hall of Fame 2012. In 1984 he received the W. C. Handy Award from the Blues Foundation and the Academy of Country Music s first Golden Hat Award. In 1987 he received the American Music Awards Award of Merit. 288 A Junkie XL remix of Presleys A Little Less Conversation credited as Elvis Vs JXL was used in a Nike advertising campaign during the 2002 FIFA World Cup . It topped the charts in over twenty countries and was included in a compilation of Presleys number-one hits ELV1S which was also an international success. The album returned Presley to the top of the Billboard chart for the first time in almost three decades. 289 In 2003 a remix of Rubberneckin a 1969 recording topped the U.S. sales chart as did a 50th-anniversary re-release of Thats All Right the following year. 290 The latter was an outright hit in Britain debuting at number three on the pop chart; it also made the top ten in Canada. 291 In 2005 another three reissued singles Jailhouse Rock One Night I Got Stung and Its Now or Never went to number one in the UK. They were part of a campaign that saw the re-release of all eighteen of Presleys previous chart-topping UK singles. The first All Shook Up came with a collectors box that made it ineligible to chart again; each of the other seventeen reissues hit the British top five. 292 In 2005 Forbes magazine named Presley the top-earning deceased celebrity for the fifth straight year with a gross income of 45 million. 293 He was placed second in 2006 294 returned to the top spot the next two years 295 296 and ranked fourth in 2009. 297 The following year he was ranked second with his highest annual income ever60 millionspurred by the celebration of his 75th birthday and the launch of Cirque du Soleil s Viva Elvis show in Las Vegas. 298 In November 2010 Viva Elvis: The Album was released setting his voice to newly recorded instrumental tracks. 299 300 As of mid-2011 there were an estimated 15 000 licensed Presley products 301 and he was again the second-highest-earning deceased celebrity. 302 Six years later he ranked fourth with earnings of 35 million up 8 million from 2016 due in part to the opening of a new entertainment complex Elvis Presleys Memphis and hotel The Guest House at Graceland. 303 In 2018 RCA Legacy released Elvis Presley Where No One Stands Alone a new album focused on Presley love of gospel music. Produced by Joel Weinshanker Lisa Marie Presley and Andy Childs the album introduced newly recorded instrumentation along with vocals from singers who had performed in the past with Elvis. It included a reimagined duet with Lisa Marie on the albums title track. 304 In 2022 Baz Luhrmann s film Elvis a biographical film about Presleys life was released. Presley is portrayed by Austin Butler and Parker by Tom Hanks . As of August 2022 the film had grossed 261.8 million worldwide on a 85 million budget becoming the second-highest-grossing music biopic of all-time behind Bohemian Rhapsody 2018 and the fifth-highest-grossing Australian-produced film. For his portrayal of Presley Butler won the Golden Globe and was nominated for the Oscar for Best Actor . 305 In January 2023 his 1962 Lockheed 1329 JetStar sold at an auction for 260 000. 306 Artistry Influences Presleys earliest musical influence came from gospel . His mother recalled that from the age of two at the Assembly of God church in Tupelo attended by the family he would slide down off my lap run into the aisle and scramble up to the platform. There he would stand looking at the choir and trying to sing with them. 307 In Memphis Presley frequently attended all-night gospel singings at the Ellis Auditorium where groups such as the Statesmen Quartet led the music in a style that Guralnick suggests sowed the seeds of Presleys future stage act: The Statesmen were an electric combination ... featuring some of the most thrillingly emotive singing and daringly unconventional showmanship in the entertainment world ... dressed in suits that might have come out of the window of Lanskys. ... Bass singer Jim Wetherington known universally as the Big Chief maintained a steady bottom ceaselessly jiggling first his left leg then his right with the material of the pants leg ballooning out and shimmering. He went about as far as you could go in gospel music said Jake Hess . The women would jump up just like they do for the pop shows. Preachers frequently objected to the lewd movements ... but audiences reacted with screams and swoons. 308 As a teenager Presleys musical interests were wide-ranging and he was deeply informed about both white and African-American musical idioms. Though he never had any formal training he had a remarkable memory and his musical knowledge was already considerable by the time he made his first professional recordings aged 19 in 1954. When Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller met him two years later they were astonished at his encyclopedic understanding of the blues 309 and as Stoller put it He certainly knew a lot more than we did about country music and gospel music. 141 At a press conference the following year he proudly declared I know practically every religious song thats ever been written. 132 Musicianship Presley played guitar bass and piano; he received his first guitar when he was 11 years old. He could not read or write music and had no formal lessons and played everything by ear. 310 Presley often played an instrument on his recordings and produced his own music. Presley played rhythm acoustic guitar on most of his Sun recordings and his 1950s RCA Victor albums. Presley played piano on songs such as Old Shep and First in Line from his 1956 album Elvis . 311 He is credited with playing piano on later albums such as From Elvis in Memphis and Moody Blue and on Unchained Melody which was one of the last songs that he recorded. 312 Presley played lead guitar on one of his successful singles called Are You Lonesome Tonight . 313 At one point during the 68 Comeback Special Elvis took over on lead electric guitar the first time he had ever been seen with the instrument in public playing it on songs such as Baby What You Want Me to Do and One Night . 314 The album Elvis is Back! features Presley playing a lot of acoustic guitar on songs such as I Will Be Home Again and Like a Baby . 315 Musical styles and genres Presley with his longtime vocal backup group the Jordanaires March 1957 Presley was a central figure in the development of rockabilly according to music historians. Rockabilly crystallized into a recognizable style in 1954 with Elvis Presleys first release on the Sun label writes Craig Morrison. 316 Paul Friedlander described rockabilly as essentially ... an Elvis Presley construction with the defining elements as the raw emotive and slurred vocal style and emphasis on rhythmic feeling of the blues with the string band and strummed rhythm guitar of country . 317 In Thats All Right the Presley trios first record Scotty Moores guitar solo a combination of Merle Travis style country finger-picking double-stop slides from acoustic boogie and blues-based bent-note single-string work is a microcosm of this fusion . 317 While Katherine Charlton calls Presley rockabillys originator 318 Carl Perkins another pioneer of rocknroll said that Sam Phillips Elvis and I didnt create rockabilly . 319 According to Michael Campbell the first major rockabilly song was recorded by Bill Haley . 320 In Moores view It had been there for quite a while really. Carl Perkins was doing basically the same sort of thing up around Jackson and I know for a fact Jerry Lee Lewis had been playing that kind of music ever since he was ten years old. 321 At RCA Victor Presleys rock and roll sound grew distinct from rockabilly with group chorus vocals more heavily amplified electric guitars 322 and a tougher more intense manner. 323 While he was known for taking songs from various sources and giving them a rockabillyrock and roll treatment he also recorded songs in other genres from early in his career from the pop standard Blue Moon at Sun Records to the country ballad Hows the World Treating You? on his second RCA Victor LP to the blues of Santa Claus Is Back in Town . In 1957 his first gospel record was released the four-song EP Peace in the Valley . Certified as a million-seller it became the top-selling gospel EP in recording history. 324 Presley would record gospel periodically for the rest of his life. Run On From How Great Thou Art 1967 a traditional song popular in the black gospel tradition. The arrangement evokes the percussive style of the 1930s Golden Gate Quartet . 325 326 Problems playing this file? See media help . After his return from military service in 1960 Presley continued to perform rock and roll but the characteristic style was substantially toned down. His first post-Army single the number-one hit Stuck on You is typical of this shift. RCA Victor publicity referred to its mild rock beat ; discographer Ernst Jorgensen calls it upbeat pop . 327 The number five Shes Not You 1962 integrates the Jordanaires so completely its practically doo-wop . 328 The modern bluesRB sound captured with success on Elvis Is Back! was essentially abandoned for six years until such 196667 recordings as Down in the Alley and Hi-Heel Sneakers . 329 Presleys output during most of the 1960s emphasized pop music often in the form of ballads such as Are You Lonesome Tonight? a number-one in 1960. Its Now or Never which also topped the chart that year was a classically influenced variation of pop based on the Neapolitan song O sole mio and concluding with a full-voiced operatic cadence . 330 These were both dramatic numbers but most of what Presley recorded for his many film soundtracks was in a much lighter vein. 331 While Presley performed several of his classic ballads for the 68 Comeback Special the sound of the show was dominated by aggressive rock and roll. He recorded few new straight rock and roll songs thereafter; as he explained they had become hard to find . 332 A significant exception was Burning Love his last major hit on the pop charts. Like his work of the 1950s Presleys subsequent recordings reworked pop and country songs but in markedly different permutations. His stylistic range now began to embrace a more contemporary rock sound as well as soul and funk . Much of Elvis in Memphis as well as Suspicious Minds cut at the same sessions reflected this new rock and soul fusion. In the mid-1970s many of his singles found a home on country radio the field where he first became a star. 333 Vocal style and range Publicity photo for the CBS program Stage Show January 16 1956 The developmental arc of Presleys singing voice as described by critic Dave Marsh goes from high and thrilled in the early days to lower and perplexed in the final months. 334 Marsh credits Presley with the introduction of the vocal stutter on 1955s Baby Lets Play House . 335 When on Dont Be Cruel Presley slides into a mmmmm that marks the transition between the first two verses he shows how masterful his relaxed style really is. 336 Marsh describes the vocal performance on Cant Help Falling in Love as one of gentle insistence and delicacy of phrasing with the line Shall I stay pronounced as if the words are fragile as crystal . 337 Jorgensen calls the 1966 recording of How Great Thou Art an extraordinary fulfillment of his vocal ambitions as Presley crafted for himself an ad-hoc arrangement in which he took every part of the four-part vocal from the bass intro to the soaring heights of the songs operatic climax becoming a kind of one-man quartet . 338 Guralnick finds Stand by Me from the same gospel sessions a beautifully articulated almost nakedly yearning performance but by contrast feels that Presley reaches beyond his powers on Where No One Stands Alone resorting to a kind of inelegant bellowing to push out a sound that Jake Hess of the Statesmen Quartet had in his command. Hess himself thought that while others might have voices the equal of Presleys he had that certain something that everyone searches for all during their lifetime. 339 Guralnick attempts to pinpoint that something: The warmth of his voice his controlled use of both vibrato technique and natural falsetto range the subtlety and deeply felt conviction of his singing were all qualities recognizably belonging to his talent but just as recognizably not to be achieved without sustained dedication and effort. 340 Marsh praises his 1968 reading of U.S. Male bearing down on the hard guy lyrics not sending them up or overplaying them but tossing them around with that astonishingly tough yet gentle assurance that he brought to his Sun records. 341 The performance on In the Ghetto is according to Jorgensen devoid of any of his characteristic vocal tricks or mannerisms instead relying on the exceptional clarity and sensitivity of his voice . 342 Guralnick describes the songs delivery as of almost translucent eloquence ... so quietly confident in its simplicity . 343 On Suspicious Minds Guralnick hears essentially the same remarkable mixture of tenderness and poise but supplemented with an expressive quality somewhere between stoicism at suspected infidelity and anguish over impending loss . 344 Music critic Henry Pleasants observes that Presley has been described variously as a baritone and a tenor . An extraordinary compass ... and a very wide range of vocal color have something to do with this divergence of opinion. 345 He identifies Presley as a high baritone calculating his range as two octaves and a third from the baritone low G to the tenor high B with an upward extension in falsetto to at least a D-flat. Presleys best octave is in the middle D-flat to D-flat granting an extra full step up or down. 345 In Pleasants view his voice was variable and unpredictable at the bottom often brilliant at the top with the capacity for full-voiced high Gs and As that an opera baritone might envy . 345 Scholar Lindsay Waters who figures Presleys range as two-and-a-quarter octaves emphasizes that his voice had an emotional range from tender whispers to sighs down to shouts grunts grumbles and sheer gruffness that could move the listener from calmness and surrender to fear. His voice can not be measured in octaves but in decibels; even that misses the problem of how to measure delicate whispers that are hardly audible at all. 346 Presley was always able to duplicate the open hoarse ecstatic screaming shouting wailing reckless sound of the black rhythm-and-blues and gospel singers writes Pleasants and also demonstrated a remarkable ability to assimilate many other vocal styles. 345 Public image Relationship with the African-American community Elvis Presley and Billy Ward circa 1955 When Dewey Phillips first aired Thats All Right on Memphis WHBQ many listeners who contacted the station to ask for it again assumed that its singer was black. 49 From the beginning of his national fame Presley expressed respect for African-American performers and their music and disregard for the segregation and racial prejudice then prevalent in the South. Interviewed in 1956 he recalled how in his childhood he would listen to blues musician Arthur Crudup the originator of Thats All Right bang his box the way I do now and I said if I ever got to the place where I could feel all old Arthur felt Id be a music man like nobody ever saw. 35 The Memphis World an African-American newspaper reported that Presley cracked Memphis segregation laws by attending the local amusement park on what was designated as its colored night . 35 Such statements and actions led Presley to be generally hailed in the black community during his early stardom. 35 In contrast many white adults did not like him and condemned him as depraved. Anti-negro prejudice doubtless figured in adult antagonism. Regardless of whether parents were aware of the Negro sexual origins of the phrase rock n roll Presley impressed them as the visual and aural embodiment of sex. 6 Despite the largely positive view of Presley held by African Americans a rumor spread in mid-1957 that he had announced The only thing Negroes can do for me is buy my records and shine my shoes. A journalist with the national African American weekly Jet Louie Robinson pursued the story. On the set of Jailhouse Rock Presley granted Robinson an interview though he was no longer dealing with the mainstream press. He denied making such a statement: I never said anything like that and people who know me know that I wouldnt have said it. ... A lot of people seem to think I started this business. But rock n roll was here a long time before I came along. Nobody can sing that kind of music like colored people. Lets face it: I cant sing like Fats Domino can. I know that. 347 Robinson found no evidence that the remark had ever been made and elicited testimony from many individuals indicating that Presley was anything but racist. 35 348 Blues singer Ivory Joe Hunter who had heard the rumor before he visited Graceland reported of Presley He showed me every courtesy and I think hes one of the greatest. 349 Though the rumored remark was discredited it was still being used against Presley decades later. 350 The persistence of such attitudes was fueled by resentment over the fact that Presley whose musical and visual performance idiom owed much to African-American sources achieved the cultural acknowledgement and commercial success largely denied his black peers. 348 Into the 21st century the notion that Presley had stolen black music still found adherents. 351 350 352 Notable among African-American entertainers expressly rejecting this view was Jackie Wilson who argued A lot of people have accused Elvis of stealing the black mans music when in fact almost every black solo entertainer copied his stage mannerisms from Elvis. 353 Moreover Presley acknowledged his debt to African-American musicians throughout his career. Addressing his 68 Comeback Special audience he said Rock n roll music is basically gospel or rhythm and blues or it sprang from that. People have been adding to it adding instruments to it experimenting with it but it all boils down to that. 354 Nine years earlier he had said Rock n roll has been around for many years. It used to be called rhythm and blues. 355 Sex symbol Poster for the film Girls! Girls! Girls! 1962 visualizing Presleys sex symbol image Presleys physical attractiveness and sexual appeal were widely acknowledged. He was once beautiful astonishingly beautiful according to critic Mark Feeney . 356 Television director Steve Binder reported Im straight as an arrow and I got to tell you you stop whether youre male or female to look at him. He was that good looking. And if you never knew he was a superstar it wouldnt make any difference; if hed walked in the room youd know somebody special was in your presence. 357 His performance style was equally responsible for Presleys eroticized image. Critic George Melly described him as the master of the sexual simile treating his guitar as both phallus and girl . 358 In his Presley obituary Lester Bangs credited him with bringing overt blatant vulgar sexual frenzy to the popular arts in America . 359 Ed Sullivans declaration that he perceived a soda bottle in Presleys trousers was echoed by rumors involving a similarly positioned toilet roll tube or lead bar. 360 While Presley was marketed as an icon of heterosexuality some critics have argued that his image was ambiguous. In 1959 Sight and Sound s Peter John Dyer described his onscreen persona as aggressively bisexual in appeal . 361 Brett Farmer places the orgasmic gyrations of the title dance sequence in Jailhouse Rock within a lineage of cinematic musical numbers that offer a spectacular eroticization if not homoeroticization of the male image . 362 In the analysis of Yvonne Tasker Elvis was an ambivalent figure who articulated a peculiar feminised objectifying version of white working-class masculinity as aggressive sexual display. 363 Reinforcing Presleys image as a sex symbol were the reports of his dalliances with Hollywood stars and starlets from Natalie Wood in the 1950s to Connie Stevens and Ann-Margret in the 1960s to Candice Bergen and Cybill Shepherd in the 1970s. June Juanico of Memphis one of Presleys early girlfriends later blamed Parker for encouraging him to choose his dating partners with publicity in mind. 206 Presley never grew comfortable with the Hollywood scene and most of these relationships were insubstantial. 364 Legacy Further information: Cultural impact of Elvis Presley Cultural depictions of Elvis Presley Elvis has left the building and List of songs about or referencing Elvis Presley I know he invented rock and roll in a manner of speaking but ... thats not why hes worshiped as a god today. Hes worshiped as a god today because in addition to inventing rock and roll he was the greatest ballad singer this side of Frank Sinatra because the spiritual translucence and reined-in gut sexuality of his slow weeper and torchy pop blues still activate the hormones and slavish devotion of millions of female human beings worldwide. Robert Christgau December 24 1985 365 Presleys rise to national attention in 1956 transformed the field of popular music and had a huge effect on the broader scope of popular culture. 366 As the catalyst for the cultural revolution that was rock and roll he was central not only to defining it as a musical genre but in making it a touchstone of youth culture and rebellious attitude. 367 With its racially mixed originsrepeatedly affirmed by Presleyrock and rolls occupation of a central position in mainstream American culture facilitated a new acceptance and appreciation of black culture. 368 In this regard Little Richard said of Presley He was an integrator. Elvis was a blessing. They wouldnt let black music through. He opened the door for black music. 369 Al Green agreed: He broke the ice for all of us. 370 President Jimmy Carter remarked on Presleys legacy in 1977: His music and his personality fusing the styles of white country and black rhythm and blues permanently changed the face of American popular culture. 273 Presley also heralded the vastly expanded reach of celebrity in the era of mass communication: within a year of his first appearance on American network television he was regarded as one of the most famous people in the world. 371 Elvis impersonators in 2005 Presleys name image and voice are recognized around the world. 372 He has inspired a legion of impersonators . 373 In polls and surveys he is recognized as one of the most important popular music artists and influential Americans. e American composer and conductor Leonard Bernstein said Elvis Presley is the greatest cultural force in the twentieth century. He introduced the beat to everything and he changed everythingmusic language clothes. 382 John Lennon said that Nothing really affected me until Elvis. 383 Bob Dylan described the sensation of first hearing Presley as like busting out of jail . 370 Presleys star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6777 Hollywood Blvd For much of his adult life Presley with his rise from poverty to riches and fame had seemed to epitomize the American Dream . 384 385 In his final years and following the revelations about his circumstances after his death he became a symbol of excess and gluttony. 386 387 Increasing attention was paid to his appetite for the rich heavy Southern cooking of his upbringing foods such as chicken-fried steak and biscuits and gravy . 388 389 In particular his love of fried peanut butter banana and sometimes bacon sandwiches 390 388 now known as Elvis sandwiches 391 came to symbolize this characteristic. 392 Since 1977 there have been numerous alleged sightings of Presley . A long-standing conspiracy theory among some fans is that he faked his death. 393 394 Adherents cite alleged discrepancies in the death certificate reports of a wax dummy in his original coffin and accounts of Presley planning a diversion so he could retire in peace. 395 An unusually large number of fans have domestic shrines devoted to Presley and journey to sites with which he is connected however faintly. 396 On the anniversary of his death thousands of people gather outside Graceland for a candlelight ritual. 397 With Elvis it is not just his music that has survived death writes Ted Harrison. He himself has been raised like a medieval saint to a figure of cultic status. It is as if he has been canonized by acclamation. 396 On the 25th anniversary of Presleys death The New York Times asserted: All the talentless impersonators and appalling black velvet paintings on display can make him seem little more than a perverse and distant memory. But before Elvis was camp he was its opposite: a genuine cultural force. ... Elvis breakthroughs are underappreciated because in this rock-and-roll age his hard-rocking music and sultry style have triumphed so completely. 398 He was ranked third on Rolling Stone s list of greatest artists. Bono wrote in appreciation: In Elvis you have the blueprint for rock roll. The highness the gospel highs. The mud the Delta mud the blues. Sexual liberation. Controversy. Changing the way people feel about the world. Its all there with Elvis. 399 Not only Presleys achievements but his failings as well are seen by some cultural observers as adding to the power of his legacy as in this description by Greil Marcus: Elvis Presley is a supreme figure in American life one whose presence no matter how banal or predictable brooks no real comparisons. ... The cultural range of his music has expanded to the point where it includes not only the hits of the day but also patriotic recitals pure country gospel and really dirty blues. ... Elvis has emerged as a great artist a great rocker a great purveyor of schlock a great heart throb a great bore a great symbol of potency a great ham a great nice person and yes a great American. 400 Achievements Having sold about 500 million records worldwide Presley is one of the best-selling music artists of all time. b Presleys rankings for top ten and number-one hits vary depending on how the double-sided Hound DogDont Be Cruel and DontI Beg of You singles which precede the inception of Billboard s unified Hot 100 chart are analyzed. f According to Whitburns analysis Presley holds the record with 38 tying with Madonna ; 404 per Billboard s current assessment he ranks second with 36. 405 Whitburn and Billboard concur that the Beatles hold the record for most number-one hits with 20 and that Mariah Carey is second with 19. 406 Whitburn has Presley with 18: 404 Billboard has him third with 17. 407 According to Billboard Presley has 79 cumulative weeks at number one: alone at 80 according to Whitburn and the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 408 409 with only Mariah Carey having more with 91 weeks. 410 He holds the records for most number-one singles on the UK chart with 21 and singles reaching the top ten with 76. 411 412 As an album artist Presley is credited by Billboard with the record for the most albums charting in the Billboard 200 : 129 far ahead of second-place Frank Sinatras 82. He also holds the record for most cumulative weeks at number one on the Billboard 200 for a male solo artists: 67 weeks 413 In 2015 and 2016 two albums setting Presleys vocals against music by the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra If I Can Dream and The Wonder of You both reached number one in the UK. This gave him a new record for number-one UK albums by a solo artist with 13 and extended his record for longest span between number-one albums by anybodyPresley had first topped the British chart in 1956 with his self-titled debut. 414 As of 2023 update the Recording Industry Association of America RIAA credits Presley with 146.5 million certified album sales in the US third all time behind the Beatles and Garth Brooks . 415 He holds the records for most gold albums 101 nearly double second-place Barbra Streisand s 51 416 and most platinum albums 57. 417 His 25 multi-platinum albums is second behind the Beatles 26. 418 His total of 197 album certification awards including one diamond award far outpaces the Beatles second-best 122. 419 He has the 9th-most gold singles 54 tied with Justin Bieber 420 and the 16th-most platinum singles 27. 421 In 2012 the spider Paradonea presleyi was named in his honor. 422 In 2018 President Donald Trump awarded Presley the Presidential Medal of Freedom posthumously. 423 There is a street named after Presley in San Antonio Texas . 424 Discography Main articles: Elvis Presley albums discography Elvis Presley singles discography and List of songs recorded by Elvis Presley A vast number of recordings have been issued under Presleys name. The number of his original master recordings has been variously calculated as 665 425 and 711. 356 His career began and he was most successful during an era when singles were the primary commercial medium for pop music. For his albums the distinction between official studio records and other forms is often blurred. citation needed Studio albums Elvis Presley 1956 Elvis 1956 Elvis Christmas Album 1957 Elvis Is Back! 1960 His Hand in Mine 1960 Something for Everybody 1961 Pot Luck 1962 Elvis for Everyone! 1965 How Great Thou Art 1967 From Elvis in Memphis 1969 From Memphis to Vegas From Vegas to Memphis 1969 Thats the Way It Is 1970 Elvis Country Im 10 000 Years Old 1971 Love Letters from Elvis 1971 Elvis Sings The Wonderful World of Christmas 1971 Elvis Now 1972 He Touched Me 1972 Elvis 1973 The Fool Album Raised on Rock For Ol Times Sake 1973 Good Times 1974 Promised Land 1975 Today 1975 From Elvis Presley Boulevard Memphis Tennessee 1976 Moody Blue 1977 Soundtrack albums original material Loving You 1957 King Creole 1958 G.I. Blues 1960 Blue Hawaii 1961 Girls! Girls! Girls! 1962 It Happened at the Worlds Fair 1963 Fun in Acapulco 1963 Kissin Cousins 1964 Roustabout 1964 Girl Happy 1965 Harum Scarum 1965 Frankie and Johnny 1966 Paradise Hawaiian Style 1966 Spinout 1966 Double Trouble 1967 Clambake 1967 Speedway 1968 Filmography Main article: Elvis Presley on film and television Films starred Love Me Tender 1956 Loving You 1957 Jailhouse Rock 1957 King Creole 1958 G.I. Blues 1960 Flaming Star 1960 Wild in the Country 1961 Blue Hawaii 1961 Follow That Dream 1962 Kid Galahad 1962 Girls! Girls! Girls! 1962 It Happened at the Worlds Fair 1963 Fun in Acapulco 1963 Kissin Cousins 1964 Viva Las Vegas 1964 Roustabout 1964 Girl Happy 1965 Tickle Me 1965 Harum Scarum 1965 Frankie and Johnny 1966 Paradise Hawaiian Style 1966 Spinout 1966 Easy Come Easy Go 1967 Double Trouble 1967 Clambake 1967 Stay Away Joe 1968 Speedway 1968 Live a Little Love a Little 1968 Charro! 1969 The Trouble with Girls 1969 Change of Habit 1969 Elvis: Thats the Way It Is 1970 Elvis on Tour 1972 TV concert specials Elvis 1968 Aloha from Hawaii via Satellite 1973 Elvis in Concert 1977 See also Elvis Presley Enterprises List of artists by number of UK Albums Chart number ones List of artists by number of UK Singles Chart number ones List of bestselling music artists Personal relationships of Elvis Presley Explanatory notes a b Although some pronounce his surname p r z l i PREZ -lee Presley himself pronounced it p r s l i PRESS -lee as did his family and those who worked with him. 2 The correct spelling of his middle name has long been a matter of debate. The physician who delivered him wrote Elvis Aaron Presley in his ledger. 3 The state-issued birth certificate reads Elvis Aron Presley . The name was chosen after the Presleys friend and fellow congregation member Aaron Kennedy though a single-A spelling was probably intended by Presleys parents to parallel the middle name of Presleys stillborn brother Jesse Garon. 4 It reads Aron on most official documents produced during his lifetime including his high school diploma RCA Victor record contract and marriage license and this was generally taken to be the proper spelling. 5 In 1966 Presley expressed the desire to his father that the more traditional biblical rendering Aaron be used henceforth especially on legal documents . 3 Five years later the Jaycees citation honoring him as one of the countrys Outstanding Young Men used Aaron. Late in his life he sought to officially change the spelling to Aaron and discovered that state records already listed it that way. Knowing his wishes for his middle name Aaron is the spelling his father chose for Presleys tombstone and it is the spelling his estate has designated as official. 5 a b The estimates of Elvis Presleys record sales vary from 500 million 1 billion records worldwide. 401 402 403 Of the 40 000 5 000 covered back royalties owed by Sun. 73 In 195657 Presley was also credited as a co-writer on several songs where he had no hand in the writing process: Heartbreak Hotel ; Dont Be Cruel ; all four songs from his first film including the title track Love Me Tender ; Paralyzed ; and All Shook Up . 76 Parker however failed to register Presley with such musical licensing firms as ASCAP and its rival BMI which eventually denied Presley annuity from songwriters royalties. Presley received credit on two other songs to which he did contribute: he provided the title for Thats Someone You Never Forget 1961 written by his friend and former Humes schoolmate Red West ; they collaborated with another friend guitarist Charlie Hodge on Youll Be Gone 1962. 77 VH1 ranked Presley No. 8 among the 100 Greatest Artists of Rock Roll in 1998. 374 The BBC ranked him as the No. 2 Voice of the Century in 2001. 375 Rolling Stone placed him No. 3 in its list of The Immortals: The Fifty Greatest Artists of All Time in 2004. 376 CMT ranked him No. 15 among the 40 Greatest Men in Country Music in 2005. 377 The Discovery Channel placed him No. 8 on its Greatest American list in 2005. 378 Variety put him in the top ten of its 100 Icons of the Century in 2005. 379 The Atlantic ranked him No. 66 among the 100 Most Influential Figures in American History in 2006. 380 Rolling Stone ranked him No. 17 on its 2023 list of the 200 Greatest Singers of All Time. 381 Whitburn follows actual Billboard history in considering the four songs on the Dont Be CruelHound Dog and DontI Beg of You singles as distinct. He tallies each side of the former single as a number-one Billboard s sales chart had Dont Be Cruel at number one for five weeks then Hound Dog for six and reckons I Beg of You as a top ten as it reached number eight on the old Top 100 chart. Billboard now considers both singles as unified items ignoring the historical sales split of the former and its old Top 100 chart entirely. Whitburn thus analyzes the four songs as yielding three number ones and a total of four top tens. Billboard now states that they yielded just two number ones and a total of two top tens voiding the separate chart appearances of Hound Dog and I Beg of You . References Citations a b c US Department of Defense 1960 . Elster 2006 p. 391. a b Nash 2005 p. 11. a b Guralnick 1994 p. 13. a b Adelman 2002 pp. 1315. a b Billboard writer Arnold Shaw cited in Denisoff 1975 p. 22. Brown Broeske 1997 p. 55. Eames 2022a . Eames 2022b . Earl 2017 . a b Guralnick 1994 pp. 1214. Guralnick 1994 pp. 1112 2324. Victor 2008 p. 419. Guralnick 1994 pp. 1516. Guralnick 1994 pp. 1718. Guralnick 1994 p. 19. Dundy 2004 p. 101. Guralnick 1994 p. 23. Guralnick 1994 pp. 2326. Guralnick 1994 pp. 1921. Dundy 2004 pp. 9596. Guralnick 1994 pp. 3233. Guralnick 1994 p. 36. Guralnick 1994 pp. 3538. Guralnick 1994 pp. 4041. Guralnick 1994 pp. 44 46 51. Guralnick 1994 pp. 5253. Guralnick 1994 p. 171. Matthew-Walker 1979 p. 3. Guralnick 1994 pp. 4648 358. Wadey 2004 . Guralnick 1994 pp. 4748 7778. Guralnick 1994 pp. 3840. Guralnick 1994 p. 51. a b c d e Guralnick 2004 . Bertrand 2000 p. 205. Szatmary 1996 p. 35. Guralnick 1994 p. 54. Jorgensen 1998 p. 8. Guralnick 1994 pp. 6264. Guralnick 1994 p. 65. Guralnick 1994 p. 77. Guralnick 1994 p. 83. Marcus 1982 p. 174. Miller 2000 p. 72. Jorgensen 1998 pp. 1011. Guralnick 1994 pp. 9497. Ponce de Leon 2007 p. 43. a b Guralnick 1994 pp. 100101. Guralnick 1994 pp. 102104. Guralnick 1994 pp. 105 139. Miller 2021 . Rodman 2013 p. 151. Guralnick 1994 pp. 106 108111. Guralnick 1994 p. 110. Guralnick 1994 p. 139. Guralnick 1994 p. 119. Guralnick 1994 pp. 117127 131. Guralnick 1994 pp. 128130. Mason 2007 pp. 3738. Guralnick 1994 pp. 127128 135142. Guralnick 1994 pp. 152 156 182. a b Guralnick 1994 pp. 144 159 167168. a b Nash 2003 pp. 612. Guralnick 1994 p. 163. Bertrand 2000 p. 104. Hopkins 2007 p. 53. Guralnick Jorgensen 1999 p. 45. Jorgensen 1998 p. 29. Rogers 1982 p. 41. Guralnick 1994 pp. 217219. Jorgensen 1998 p. 31. a b Stanley Coffey 1998 pp. 2829. Escott 1998 p. 421. Jorgensen 1998 pp. 36 54. Jorgensen 1998 pp. 35 51 57 61 75. Jorgensen 1998 pp. 157158 166 168. Stanley Coffey 1998 p. 29. a b c Stanley Coffey 1998 p. 30. Guralnick 1994 pp. 235136. Slaughter Nixon 2004 p. 21. Guralnick Jorgensen 1999 pp. 50 54 64. Hilburn 2005 . Rodman 1996 p. 28. Guralnick 1994 pp. 262263. Guralnick 1994 p. 267. Koch Manning Toplikar 2008 . Guralnick 1994 p. 274. a b Victor 2008 p. 315. Guralnick Jorgensen 1999 pp. 7273. Guralnick 1994 pp. 273 284. Fensch 2001 pp. 1418. a b Burke Griffin 2006 p. 52. Jorgensen 1998 p. 49. Gould 1956 . a b Guralnick Jorgensen 1999 p. 73. a b c d e Marcus 2006 . Marsh 1982 p. 100. Austen 2005 p. 13. Allen 1992 p. 270. Rock N Roll Stars 1956 p. 5. Keogh 2004 p. 73. Jorgensen 1998 p. 51. Guralnick Jorgensen 1999 pp. 8081. Whitburn 1993 p. 5. Jorgensen 1998 pp. 6065. a b Austen 2005 p. 16. Edgerton 2007 p. 187. Brown Broeske 1997 p. 93. Guralnick 1994 p. 338. a b Gibson 2005 . a b Victor 2008 p. 439. Jezer 1982 p. 281. Moore Dickerson 1997 p. 175. Guralnick 1994 p. 343. Guralnick 1994 p. 335. Marsh 1980 p. 395. OMalley 2016 . Jorgensen 1998 p. 71. Palladino 1996 p. 131. Stanley Coffey 1998 p. 37. Clayton Heard 2003 pp. 117118. Keogh 2004 p. 90. Guralnick Jorgensen 1999 p. 95. Salisbury 1957 p. 4. Guralnick 1994 pp. 395397. Guralnick 1994 pp. 406408 452. Fox 1986 p. 178. Leigh 2017 p. 187. Guralnick 1994 pp. 399402 428430 437440. a b Guralnick 1994 p. 400. a b Guralnick 1994 p. 430. Turner 2004 p. 104. Guralnick 1994 p. 437. Guralnick 1994 p. 431. Grein 2008 . Caulfield 2016 . Baird 2017 . Guralnick 1994 pp. 431435. Guralnick 1994 pp. 448449. a b Fox 1986 p. 179. Jorgensen 1998 pp. 99 105. Guralnick 1994 pp. 461474. Victor 2008 p. 27. Jorgensen 1998 pp. 106111. Guralnick 1994 pp. 474480. Neibaur 2014 p. 51 . Guralnick 1999 p. 21. Tillery 2013 p. 60. Eiland 2018 . Corcoran 1998 . Tillery 2013 Chapter 5: Patriot. Guralnick 1999 pp. 47 49 55 60 73. Clayton Heard 2003 p. 160. Jeffrey Kaplan 2022 . Presley 1985 p. 40. Jorgensen 1998 p. 107. Whitburn 2010 p. 520. Marcus 1982 p. 278. Matthew-Walker 1979 p. 49. Slaughter Nixon 2004 p. 54. Matthew-Walker 1979 p. 19. Slaughter Nixon 2004 p. 57. Marcus 1982 pp. 279280. Robertson 2004 p. 50. Red Carpet 1960 . Jorgensen 1998 pp. 124127 414. Guralnick 1999 pp. 44 6263. Gordon 2005 pp. 110 114. Jorgensen 1998 p. 148. Robertson 2004 p. 52. Gordon 2005 pp. 110 119. Ponce de Leon 2007 p. 133. Caine 2005 p. 21. Fields 2007 . Guralnick 1994 p. 449. Kirchberg Hendrickx 1999 p. 67. Lisanti 2000 pp. 19 136. Jorgensen 1998 p. 201. Hopkins 2002 p. 32. Marsh 2004 p. 650. Guralnick 1999 pp. 261263. Kirchberg Hendrickx 1999 p. 73. a b Keogh 2004 p. 263. Rolling Stone 2009 . Guralnick 1999 p. 171. Whitburn 2010 p. 521. Kubernick 2008 p. 4. Guralnick 1999 pp. 293 296. a b c Kubernick 2008 p. 26. Hopkins 2007 p. 215. Marsh 2004 p. 649. Jorgensen 1998 p. 277. Marsh 1980 p. 396. Jorgensen 1998 p. 419. Gordon 2005 p. 146. Jorgensen 1998 p. 283. Guralnick 1999 p. 343. Guralnick 1999 pp. 346347. Gordon 2005 pp. 149150. Cook 2004 p. 39. Guralnick Jorgensen 1999 pp. 259 262. Moyer 2002 p. 73. Jorgensen 1998 p. 287. Whitburn 2010 pp. 521522. a b Stein 1997 . Mason 2007 p. 81. Stanley Coffey 1998 p. 94. Stanley Coffey 1998 p. 95. Hopkins 2007 p. 253. Hopkins 2007 p. 254. Stanley Coffey 1998 p. 96. Robertson 2004 p. 70. Stanley Coffey 1998 p. 99. Guralnick 1999 pp. 419422. Jorgensen 1998 pp. 284 286 307308 313 326 338 357358. Guralnick 1999 p. 420. The Beatles 2000 p. 192. Jorgensen 1998 p. 321. McPhate 2017 . Guralnick Jorgensen 1999 pp. 299300. Jorgensen 1998 p. 319. Marcus 1982 pp. 284185. Guralnick Jorgensen 1999 p. 308. Marcus 1982 p. 283. Williamson 2015 pp. 253254. Guralnick 1999 pp. 451 446 453. Guralnick 1999 p. 456. Marsh 2015 . Hopkins 2007 p. 291. Guralnick 1999 p. 474. Moscheo 2007 p. 132. Keogh 2004 pp. 234235. Guralnick 1999 p. 478. Hopkins 2002 pp. 61 67 73. Hopkins 2002 p. 73. Victor 2008 p. 10. Brown Broeske 1997 p. 364. Guralnick 1999 p. 475. Fessier 2013 . Sun Bruce Fessier. Director remembers landmark Elvis Presley performance . USA TODAY . Retrieved August 12 2024 . Those figures now seem dubious. Aloha was transmitted to 38 nations the combined populations of those countries was 1.3 billion. The Guinness Book of World Records says the largest TV audience for a performance was the 1993 Super Bowl halftime show by Michael Jackson which drew 133.4 million viewers. Mason 2007 p. 141. RIAA 2010 . Jorgensen 1998 pp. 422425. Guralnick 1999 pp. 488490. Guralnick Jorgensen 1999 p. 329. a b c Higginbotham 2002 . Keogh 2004 p. 238. Guralnick 1999 pp. 481 487 499 504 519520. Guralnick 1999 p. 547. Hopkins 1986 p. 136. Guralnick 1999 p. 560. Guralnick Jorgensen 1999 p. 336. Jorgensen 1998 p. 381. a b Grammy 2014 . Guralnick 1999 pp. 584585. Guralnick 1999 pp. 593595. Guralnick 1999 p. 595. Jorgensen 1998 p. 397. Gostin 2023 . Speakman 2023 . Scherman 2006 . Greene 2018 . Guralnick 1999 p. 628. Guralnick 1999 pp. 628630. Guralnick 1999 p. 634. Guralnick 1999 pp. 212 642. a b Guralnick 1999 p. 638. Harrison 2016 p. 23. Alden 2014 . Guralnick 1999 pp. 645648. Harrison 2016 p. 242. a b Woolley Peters 1977 . Hopkins 2007 p. 386. a b Guralnick 1999 p. 660. Victor 2008 pp. 581582. Matthew-Walker 1979 p. 26. Pendergast Pendergast 2000 p. 108. a b Whitburn 2006 p. 273. Warwick Kutner Brown 2004 pp. 860866. a b c Ramsland 2010 . Guralnick 1999 pp. 651653. a b Baden Hennessee 1990 p. 35. Tennant 2013 p. 2. a b Williamson 2015 pp. 1114. Brown Broeske 1997 p. 433. National Park Service 2010 . Cook 2004 p. 33. Garrity 2002 . Bronson 2004 p. 1. Hits of the World 2004 . Sexton 2007 . Goldman Ewalt 2007 . Rose 2006 . Goldman Paine 2007 . Hoy 2008 . Pomerantz et al. 2009 . Rose et al. 2010 . Baillie 2010 . Bouchard 2010 . Lynch 2011 . Pomerantz 2011 . Greenburg 2017 . Legacy 2018 . Box Office Mojo . Walker 2023 . Guralnick 1994 p. 14. Guralnick 1994 pp. 4748. Bertrand 2000 p. 211. Graceland Blog 2015 . Osborne 2017 p. 73 . Duffett 2018 p. 189 . Murray 1961 p. 65. Marcus 2015 p. 341 . Eder 2013 p. 149 . Morrison 1996 p. x. a b Friedlander 1996 p. 45. Charlton 2006 p. 103. Jancik 1998 p. 16. Campbell 2009 p. 161. Guralnick 1989 p. 104. Gillett 2000 p. 113. Jorgensen 1998 p. 39. Wolfe 1994 p. 14. Wolfe 1994 p. 22. Keogh 2004 p. 184. Jorgensen 1998 p. 123. Marsh 1982 p. 145. Jorgensen 1998 pp. 213 237. Guralnick 1999 p. 65. Jorgensen 1998 pp. 142143. Jorgensen 1998 p. 343. Ponce de Leon 2007 p. 199. Marsh 1982 p. 234. Marsh 1989 p. 317. Marsh 1989 p. 91. Marsh 1989 p. 490. Jorgensen 1998 p. 212. Guralnick 1999 p. 232. Guralnick 1999 p. 231. Marsh 1989 p. 424. Jorgensen 1998 p. 271. Guralnick 1999 p. 332. Guralnick 1999 p. 335. a b c d Pleasants 2004 p. 260. Waters 2003 p. 205. Williams 2012 . a b Pilgrim 2006 . Guralnick 1994 p. 426. a b Kolawole 2002 . Ushe Naledi June 30 2022. Appropriation or appreciation? How Elvis highlights his complicated history with Black music . USA Today . Retrieved April 8 2024 . Myrie 2009 pp. 123124. Masley 2002 . Osborne 2000 p. 207. Bertrand 2000 p. 198. a b Feeney 2010 . Ashley 2009 p. 76. Rodman 1996 p. 58. Rodman 1996 pp. 5859. Garber 1997 p. 366. Dyer 19591960 p. 30. Farmer 2000 p. 86. Tasker 2007 p. 208. Kirchberg Hendrickx 1999 p. 109. Christgau 1985 . Collins 2002 . Sadie 1994 p. 638. Bertrand 2000 p. 94. Rodman 1996 p. 193. a b Victor 2008 p. 356. Arnett 2006 p. 400. Doss 1999 p. 2. Lott Uebel 1997 p. 192. VH1 1998 . BBC News 2001 . Rolling Stone 2004 . CMT 2005 . Discovery Channel 2005 . Variety 2005 . Atlantic 2006 . Rolling Stone 2023 . Keogh 2004 p. 2. Davies 1996 p. 19. Nash 2005 p. xv. Harrison 2016 p. 149. Cosby 2016 p. 144. Doll 2016 p. 186. a b Martin 2000 . Smith 2002 . Dundy 2004 pp. 227 256. Wilson 2010 p. 121. Slater 2002 . Harrison 1992 pp. 42 157160 169. Clarke 2006 pp. 77 80. Harrison 1992 pp. 159160. a b Harrison 2016 p. 10. Segre 2002 . New York Times 2002 . Bono 2010 Elvis . Marcus 1982 pp. 141142. Reuters 2022 . Liz Nickles Savita Iyer. Brandstorm: Surviving and Thriving in the New Consumer-Led Marketplace . Macmillan Publishers . p. 77. An iconic guitar from Elvis Presleys Comeback Special is up for auction . CNN . March 14 2021. a b Whitburn 2010 p. 875. Hasty 2008 . Trust 2022 . Moody 2008 . Whitburn 2010 p. 876. RRHF 2010 . Trust 2023 . Myers 2022 . Myers 2021 . Trust 2015 . Sexton 2016 . RIAA 2020a . RIAA 2020b . RIAA 2020c . RIAA 2020d . Lewis 2017 . RIAA 2020e . RIAA 2020f . Miller et al. 2012 . BBC News 2018 . Brown Merrisa September 30 2014. San Antonio street names and groupings . mysanantonio.com . Victor 2008 p. 438. General sources Adelman Kim 2002. The Girls Guide to Elvis: The Clothes the Hair the Women and More! . Random House. ISBN 978-0-7679-1188-7 . Alden Ginger 2014. Elvis Ginger: Elvis Presleys Fiancee and Last Love Finally Tells her Story . Berkeley Publishing. ISBN 978-1-101-61613-0 . Allen Steve 1992. Hi-Ho Steverino!: My Adventures in the Wonderful Wacky World of TV . Thorndike Press. ISBN 978-1-56054-521-7 . Arnett Jeffrey Jensen 2006. Adolescence and Emerging Adulthood: A Cultural Approach 3rd ed.. Pearson Prentice Hall. ISBN 978-0-13-195071-9 . Ashley Martin 2009. How High Should Boys Sing? . Ashgate. ISBN 978-0-7546-6475-8 . The Top 100 . The Atlantic . December 2006. Archived from the original on September 16 2014 . Retrieved January 19 2018 . Austen Jake 2005. TV-A-Go-Go: Rock on TV from American Bandstand to American Idol . Chicago Review Press. ISBN 978-1-55652-572-8 . Baden Michael M.; Hennessee Judith Adler 1990. Unnatural Death: Confessions of a Medical Examiner . Ballantine. ISBN 978-0-8041-0599-6 . Baillie Russell November 6 2010. Album Review: Elvis Presley Viva Elvis The Album . The New Zealand Herald . Archived from the original on August 6 2020 . Retrieved November 9 2010 . Baird Robert December 23 2017. Elvis and the Royal Philharmonic . Stereophile . Archived from the original on January 18 2018 . Retrieved January 17 2018 . Sinatra Is Voice of the Century . BBC News. April 18 2001. Archived from the original on January 6 2009 . Retrieved December 29 2009 . Elvis Presley gets US Presidential Medal of Freedom . BBC News. November 16 2018. Archived from the original on November 16 2018 . Retrieved November 17 2018 . The Beatles 2000. The Beatles Anthology . Chronicle Books. ISBN 978-0-8118-2684-6 . Bertrand Michael T. 2000. Race Rock and Elvis . University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-02586-0 . Bono December 3 2010. 100 Greatest Artists . Rolling Stone . Archived from the original on January 31 2024 . Retrieved January 31 2024 . Bouchard Dany November 5 2010. Priscilla Presley Keeps King Alive . Toronto Sun . Archived from the original on March 14 2017 . Retrieved November 9 2010 . Elvis 2022 . Box Office Mojo . Archived from the original on July 13 2022 . Retrieved August 15 2022 . Bronson Fred July 3 2004. Chart Beat . Billboard . p. 57. Brown Peter Harry; Broeske Pat H. 1997. Down at the End of Lonely Street: The Life and Death of Elvis Presley . Signet. ISBN 978-0-451-19094-9 . Duffett Mark 2018. Counting Down Elvis: His 100 Finest Songs . Rowman Littlefield Publishers. ISBN 978-1-4422-4805-2 . Burke Ken; Griffin Dan 2006. The Blue Moon Boys: The Story of Elvis Presleys Band . Chicago Review Press. ISBN 978-1-55652-614-5 . Caine Andrew 2005. Interpreting Rock Movies: The Pop Film and Its Critics in Britain . Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-7190-6538-5 . Campbell Michael 2009. Popular Music in America 3rd ed.. Caulfield Keith November 25 2016. Popular Demand . Billboard . Archived from the original on January 5 2018 . Retrieved January 17 2018 . Charlton Katherine 2006. Rock Music Styles: A History 5th ed.. McGraw-Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-312162-8 . Christgau Robert December 24 1985. Christgaus Consumer Guide . The Village Voice . Archived from the original on October 16 2023 . Retrieved August 26 2012 . Clarke Steve 2006. Conspiracy Theories and Conspiracy Theorizing . In Coady David ed.. Conspiracy Theories: The Philosophical Debate . Ashgate. ISBN 978-0-7546-5250-2 . Clayton Dick; Heard James 2003. Elvis: By Those Who Knew Him Best . Virgin Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7535-0835-0 . 40 Greatest Men in Country Music . CMT. 2005. Archived from the original on June 6 2011 . Retrieved December 29 2009 . Coffey Frank 1997. The Complete Idiots Guide to Elvis . Alpha Books. Collins Dan August 7 2002. How Big Was The King? . CBS News. Associated Press. Archived from the original on July 23 2009 . Retrieved December 27 2009 . Cook Jody 2004. Graceland National Historic Landmark Nomination Form PDF . United States Department of the Interior. Archived from the original on October 13 2020 . Retrieved October 13 2020 . Corcoran John March 1 1998. The King and Karate . Black Belt . pp. 4854 . Retrieved December 17 2017 . Cosby James A. 2016. Devils Music Holy Rollers and Hillbillies: How America Gave Birth to Rock and Roll . McFarland. ISBN 978-1-4766-6229-9 . Davies Hunter 1996. The Beatles 2nd rev. ed.. W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-31571-4 . Denisoff R. Serge 1975. Solid Gold: The Popular Record Industry . Transaction Books. ISBN 978-0-87855-586-4 . Greatest American . Discovery Channel. 2005. Archived from the original on January 29 2010 . Retrieved December 29 2009 . Doll Susan 2016. Understanding Elvis: Southern Roots vs. Star Image . Routledge. ISBN 978-0-8153-3164-3 . Doss Erika Lee 1999. Elvis Culture: Fans Faith and Image . University of Kansas Press. ISBN 978-0-7006-0948-2 . Dundy Elaine 2004. Elvis and Gladys 2nd ed.. University Press of Mississippi. ISBN 978-1-57806-634-6 . Dyer Peter John Winter 19591960. The Teenage Rave . Sight and Sound . Eames Tom May 20 2022a. Who was Elvis Presleys father Vernon and what happened to him after his sons death? . Smooth Radio . Archived from the original on November 6 2023 . Retrieved November 6 2023 . Eames Tom May 20 2022b. Who was Elvis Presleys mother Gladys? The heartbreaking story behind her life and death . Smooth Radio . Archived from the original on November 6 2023 . Retrieved November 6 2023 . Earl Jennifer February 14 2017. 19 celebrities you didnt know were twins Elvis and Jesse Presley . CBS News. Archived from the original on July 15 2020 . Retrieved July 12 2020 . Eder Mike 2013. Elvis Music FAQ: All Thats Left to Know About the Kings Recorded Works . Backbeat Books. ISBN 978-1-61713-580-4 . Edgerton Gary R. 2007. The Columbia History of American Television . Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-12165-1 . Eiland Murray 2018. Elvis Presleys Coat of Arms . The Armigers News . Vol. 41 no. 1. p. 6. Archived from the original on February 21 2023 . Retrieved December 27 2022 via academia.edu. Elster Charles Harrington 2006. The Big Book of Beastly Mispronunciations . Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-618-42315-6 . Escott Colin 1998. Elvis Presley . In Kingsbury Paul ed.. The Encyclopedia of Country Music . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-517608-7 . Farmer Brett 2000. Spectacular Passions: Cinema Fantasy Gay Male Spectatorships 2nd ed.. Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0-8223-2589-5 . Feeney Mark January 3 2010. Elvis at 75: Can We Ever Again See the Performer Not the Punch Line? . The Boston Globe . Archived from the original on January 15 2010 . Retrieved February 1 2010 . Fensch Thomas 2001. The FBI Files on Elvis Presley . New Century Books. ISBN 978-0-930751-03-6 . Fessier Bruce May 10 2013. Director Remembers Landmark Elvis Presley Performance . USA Today . Archived from the original on January 28 2021 . Retrieved January 19 2018 . Fields Curt August 3 2007. A Whole Lotta Elvis Is Goin to the Small Screen . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on November 2 2012 . Retrieved December 27 2009 . Fox Ted 1986. In the Groove: The People Behind the Music . St Martins Press. ISBN 978-0-312-01776-7 . Friedlander Paul 1996. Rock and Roll: A Social History . Westview. ISBN 978-0-8133-2725-9 . Garber Marjorie 1997. Vested Interests: Cross-Dressing and Cultural Anxiety . Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-91951-7 . Garrity Brian October 12 2002. Kings Crown Shines: First No. 1 Debut . Billboard . pp. 1 3. Gibson Christine December 6 2005. Elvis on Ed Sullivan: The Real Story . American Heritage . Archived from the original on May 15 2009 . Retrieved December 31 2009 . Gillett Charlie 2000. The Five Styles of RocknRoll . In McKeen William ed.. Rock and Roll Is Here To Stay: An Anthology . W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-04700-4 . Goldman Lea; Ewalt David M. October 29 2007. Top-Earning Dead Celebrities . Forbes . Archived from the original on June 11 2008 . Retrieved January 5 2010 . Goldman Lea; Paine Jake October 29 2007. Top-Earning Dead Celebrities . Forbes . Archived from the original on April 26 2011 . Retrieved June 5 2011 . Gordon Robert 2005. The King on the Road . Bounty Books. ISBN 978-0-7537-1088-3 . Gostin Nicki June 27 2023. Elvis Presleys ex slams step-brothers claim that singer killed himself . Page Six . Archived from the original on July 14 2023. Gould Jack June 6 1956. TV: New Phenomenon Elvis Presley Rises to Fame as Vocalist Who Is Virtuoso of Hootchy-Kootchy PDF . The New York Times . Archived PDF from the original on May 29 2023 . Retrieved December 31 2009 . Elvis Presley the Musician . Graceland Blog. December 3 2015. Archived from the original on November 1 2019 . Retrieved July 1 2019 . Elvis Presley . Grammy Awards. March 17 2014. Archived from the original on April 6 2019 . Retrieved January 9 2019 . Greenburg Zack OMalley October 30 2017. The Top-Earning Dead Celebrities of 2017 . Forbes . Archived from the original on February 5 2019 . Retrieved January 8 2018 . Greene Andy July 31 2018. Flashback: Elvis Presleys Aloha From Hawaii Marks His Final Truly Great Moment . Rolling Stone . Archived from the original on January 17 2023 . Retrieved January 17 2023 . Grein Paul December 5 2008. Chart Watch Extra: The Top 40 Christmas Albums . Yahoo! Music. Archived from the original on December 24 2011 . Retrieved February 1 2010 . Guralnick Peter 1989. Lost Highway: Journeys Arrivals of American Musicians . Vintage. ISBN 978-0-394-75215-0 . Guralnick Peter 1994. Last Train to Memphis: The Rise of Elvis Presley . Little Brown. ISBN 978-0-316-33225-5 . Guralnick Peter 1999. Careless Love: The Unmaking of Elvis Presley . Back Bay Books. ISBN 978-0-316-33297-2 . Guralnick Peter January 8 2004. How Did Elvis Get Turned into a Racist? . The New York Times . Archived from the original on May 12 2021 . Retrieved August 11 2007 . Guralnick Peter; Jorgensen Ernst 1999. Elvis Day by Day: The Definitive Record of His Life and Music . Ballantine. ISBN 978-0-345-42089-3 . Harrison Ted 1992. Elvis People: The Cult of the King . Fount. ISBN 978-0-00-627620-3 . Harrison Ted 2016. The Death and Resurrection of Elvis Presley . Reaktion. ISBN 978-1-78023-637-7 . Hasty Katie May 7 2008. Madonna Leads Busy Billboard 200 with 7th No. 1 . Billboard . Archived from the original on May 23 2013 . Retrieved January 20 2018 . Higginbotham Alan August 11 2002. Doctor Feelgood . The Observer . Archived from the original on September 22 2017 . Retrieved December 29 2009 . Hilburn Robert February 6 2005. From the Man Who Would Be King . Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on July 11 2010 . Retrieved January 4 2010 . Hilburn Robert October 30 2007. This Fan of Charts Is No. 1 with a Bullet . Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on May 23 2010 . Retrieved January 17 2010 . Hits of the World . Billboard . Vol. 116 no. 30. July 24 2004. p. 62. Hopkins Jerry 1986. Elvis: The Final Years . Berkley. ISBN 978-0-425-08999-6 . Hopkins Jerry 2002. Elvis in Hawaii . Bess Press. ISBN 978-1-57306-142-1 . Hopkins Jerry 2007. Elvis The Biography . Plexus. ISBN 978-0-85965-391-6 . Hoy Peter October 27 2008. Top-Earning Dead Celebrities . Forbes . Archived from the original on July 10 2011 . Retrieved June 5 2011 . Jancik Wayne 1998. The Billboard Book of One-Hit Wonders . Jeffrey Joyann; Kaplan Anna June 27 2022 Updated November 6 2023. Priscilla Presley and Elvis Presleys relationship story in their own words . Today . Retrieved February 26 2023 . Jezer Marty 1982. The Dark Ages: Life in the United States 19451960 . South End Press. ISBN 978-0-89608-127-7 . Jorgensen Ernst 1998. Elvis Presley A Life in Music: The Complete Recording Sessions . St Martins Press. ISBN 978-0-312-18572-5 . Keogh Pamela Clarke 2004. Elvis Presley: The Man The Life The Legend . Simon Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7434-5603-6 . Kirchberg Connie; Hendrickx Marc 1999. Elvis Presley Richard Nixon and the American Dream . McFarland. ISBN 978-0-7864-0716-3 . Koch Ed; Manning Mary; Toplikar Dave May 15 2008. Showtime: How Sin City evolved into The Entertainment Capital of the World . Las Vegas Sun . Archived from the original on March 6 2019 . Retrieved March 3 2019 . Kolawole Helen August 15 2002. He Wasnt My King . The Guardian . Archived from the original on May 14 2023 . Retrieved December 27 2009 . Kubernick Harvey 2008. The Complete 68 Comeback Special . CD Booklet RCABMG. UPC 88697306262. Groundbreaking New Elvis Presley Album Where No One Stands Alone To Be Released August 10 . Legacy . Sony Music Entertainment. June 21 2018. Archived from the original on January 30 2022 . Retrieved January 30 2022 . Leigh Spencer 2017. Elvis Presley: Caught in a Trap . McNidder and Grace. ISBN 978-0-85716-166-6 . Lewis Randy August 16 2017. 40 Years After His Death Elvis Presley Is Still the King in the YouTube Age . Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on January 20 2018 . Retrieved January 19 2018 . Lisanti Tom 2000. Fantasy Femmes of 60s Cinema: Interviews with 20 Actresses from Biker Beach and Elvis Movies . McFarland. ISBN 978-0-7864-0868-9 . Lott Eric; Uebel Michael 1997. All the Kings Men: Elvis Impersonators and White Working-Class Masculinity . In Stecopoulos Harry ed.. Race and the Subject of Masculinities . Duke University Press. ISBN 978-0-8223-1966-5 . Lynch Rene August 16 2011. Elvis Presley Who Died 34 Years Ago Today Spurs Fresh Tears . Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on May 27 2022 . Retrieved August 17 2011 . Marcus Greil 1982. Mystery Train: Images of America in Rock n Roll Music Revised ed.. E.P. Dutton. ISBN 978-0-525-47708-2 . Marcus Greil 2006. Elvis Presley: The Ed Sullivan Shows . DVD Booklet Image Entertainment. UPC 01438137302. Archived from the original on December 19 2011 . Retrieved February 1 2010 . Marcus Greil 2015. Mystery Train: Images of America in Rock n Roll Music . Plume. ISBN 978-0-14-218158-4 . Marsh Dave 1980. Elvis Presley . In Marsh Dave; Swenson John eds.. The Rolling Stone Record Guide 2nd ed.. Virgin. ISBN 978-0-907080-00-8 . Marsh Dave 1982. Elvis . Times Books. ISBN 978-0-8129-0947-0 . Marsh Dave 1989. The Heart of Rock Soul: The 1001 Greatest Singles Ever Made . Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-012108-7 . Marsh Dave 2004. Elvis Presley . In Brackett Nathan; Hoard Christian eds.. The New Rolling Stone Album Guide 4th ed.. Simon Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-0169-8 . Marsh Stefanie December 21 2015. Did Elvis indoctrinate me? Probably but I dont see it as a bad thing . The Times . Archived from the original on June 19 2022 . Retrieved April 5 2018 . Martin Douglas June 5 2000. Mary Jenkins Langston 78 Cook for Presley . The New York Times . Archived from the original on January 21 2018 . Retrieved January 20 2018 . Masley Ed August 15 2002. Its Good To Be King . Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . Archived from the original on August 19 2023 . Retrieved January 31 2010 . Mason Bobbie Ann 2007. Elvis Presley . Penguin. ISBN 978-0-14-303889-4 . Matthew-Walker Robert 1979. Elvis Presley. A Study in Music . Midas Books. ISBN 978-0-85936-162-0 . McPhate Tim August 15 2017. Elvis: Do You Know These 5 Facts? . Grammy Awards. Archived from the original on December 27 2019 . Retrieved January 9 2019 . Miller Jeremy A.; Griswold Charles E.; Scharff Nikolaj; Rezac Milan; Szuts Tamas; Marhabaie Mohammad May 18 2012. The velvet spiders: an atlas of the Eresidae Arachnida Araneae . ZooKeys 195: 1144. Bibcode : 2012ZooK..195....1M . doi : 10.3897zookeys.195.2342 . ISSN 1313-2970 . PMC 3361087 . PMID 22679386 . Miller James 2000. Flowers in the Dustbin: The Rise of Rock and Roll 19471977 . Fireside. ISBN 978-0-684-86560-7 . Miller Madison March 23 2021. Elvis Presley: How the King of Rock n Rolling Developed His Signature Dance Moves . Outsider . Archived from the original on February 14 2022 . Retrieved February 14 2022 . Moody Nekesa Mumbi April 2 2008. Mariah Carey Surpasses Elvis in No. 1s . USA Today . Associated Press. Archived from the original on May 12 2023 . Retrieved April 14 2010 . Moore Scotty; Dickerson James 1997. Thats Alright Elvis . Schirmer Books. ISBN 978-0-02-864599-5 . Morrison Craig 1996. Go Cat Go!: Rockabilly Music and Its Makers . University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-02207-4 . Moscheo Joe 2007. The Gospel Side of Elvis . Center Street. ISBN 978-1-59995-729-6 . Moyer Susan M. 2002. Elvis: The King Remembered . Sports Publishing LLC. ISBN 978-1-58261-558-5 . Murray Don October 1961. One Million Times 98 . HiFiStereo Review . Vol. 7 no. 4. Ziff-Davis Publishing Company. pp. 6366. Myers Justin September 30 2022. Artists with the most Number 1 singles on the UK chart . Official Charts Company . Archived from the original on February 26 2022 . Retrieved October 15 2022 . Myers Justin September 17 2021. Artists with the most Top 10 singles in the UK . Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on June 17 2022 . Retrieved October 15 2022 . Myrie Russell 2009. Dont Rhyme for the Sake of Riddlin: The Authorized Story of Public Enemy . Canongate. ISBN 978-1-84767-182-0 . Nash Alanna 2003. The Colonel: The Extraordinary Story of Colonel Tom Parker and Elvis Presley . Simon Schuster. ISBN 978-0-7432-1301-1 . Nash Alanna 2005. Elvis and the Memphis Mafia . Aurum. ISBN 978-1-84513-128-9 . Graceland . National Park Service. 2010. Archived from the original on December 30 2011 . Retrieved January 7 2010 . Neibaur James L. 2014. The Elvis Movies . Rowman Littlefield. ISBN 978-1-4422-3074-3 . Archived from the original on March 21 2024 . Retrieved March 21 2024 . Long Live the King . The New York Times . August 16 2002. Archived from the original on January 19 2008 . Retrieved December 30 2009 . OMalley Sheila April 4 2016. Love Me Tender . Bright WallDark Room . Archived from the original on January 18 2018 . Retrieved January 17 2018 . Osborne Jerry 2000. Elvis: Word for Word . Harmony. ISBN 978-0-609-60803-6 . Osborne Jerry 2017. Presleyana VIII the Elvis Presley Record CD and Memorabilia Price Guide . Jerry Osborne Enterprises. ISBN 978-0-932117-97-7 . Archived from the original on March 21 2024 . Retrieved March 21 2024 . Palladino Grace 1996. Teenagers: An American History . Westview. ISBN 978-0-465-00766-0 . Pendergast Sara; Pendergast Tom 2000. St. James Encyclopedia of Popular Culture 4th ed.. St. James Press. ISBN 978-1-55862-404-7 . Pilgrim David March 2006. Question of the Month: Elvis Presley and Racism . Jim Crow Museum of Racist Memorabilia. Archived from the original on January 6 2012 . Retrieved December 28 2009 . Pleasants Henry 2004. Elvis Presley . In Frith Simon ed.. Popular Music: Critical Concepts in Media and Cultural Studies Volume 3: Popular Music Analysis . Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-33269-9 . Pomerantz Dorothy October 25 2011. The Top-Earning Dead Celebrities . Forbes . Archived from the original on April 7 2019 . Retrieved January 6 2012 . Pomerantz Dorothy; Lacey Rose; Lauren Streib; Thibault Marie October 27 2009. Top-Earning Dead Celebrities . Forbes . Archived from the original on December 5 2012 . Retrieved January 5 2010 . Ponce de Leon Charles L. 2007. Fortunate Son: The Life of Elvis Presley . Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-8090-1641-9 . Presley Priscilla 1985. Elvis and Me . G.P. Putnams Sons. ISBN 978-0-399-12984-1 . Ramsland Katherine 2010. Cyril Wecht: Forensic Pathologist Coverup for a King . TruTV. Archived from the original on November 5 2013. Top 100 Albums . Recording Industry Association of America. 2010. Archived from the original on July 1 2007 . Retrieved January 31 2010 . Gold Platinum: Top Artists Albums . Recording Industry Association of America. 2020. Archived from the original on December 3 2017 . Retrieved February 8 2020 . Gold Platinum: Artists AlbumsEPs Gold . Recording Industry Association of America. 2020. Archived from the original on April 24 2020 . Retrieved February 8 2020 . Gold Platinum: Artists AlbumsEPs Platinum . Recording Industry Association of America. 2020. Archived from the original on April 24 2020 . Retrieved February 8 2020 . Gold Platinum: Artists AlbumsEPs Multi-Platinum . Recording Industry Association of America. 2020. Archived from the original on April 24 2020 . Retrieved February 8 2020 . Gold Platinum: Artists Singles Gold . Recording Industry Association of America. 2020. Archived from the original on June 13 2020 . Retrieved February 8 2020 . Gold Platinum: Artists Singles Platinum . Recording Industry Association of America. 2020. Archived from the original on June 13 2020 . Retrieved February 8 2020 . Red Carpet for Elvis LP . Billboard . April 18 1960. p. 11. Universal Music cant help falling for Elvis Presley to manage song catalog . Reuters . April 12 2022. Archived from the original on July 18 2022 . Retrieved March 19 2023 . Robertson John 2004. Elvis Presley: The Complete Guide to His Music . Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-1-84449-711-9 . Elvis Presley . Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. 2010. Archived from the original on June 29 2016 . Retrieved July 22 2010 . Elvis Presley: King of Rock . Rock N Roll Stars . 1956. pp. 213. via Rabbers Jans July 11 2013. Rock N Roll Stars 1956 . Smelly Paper Vintage Magazines . Archived from the original on October 7 2023 . Retrieved December 5 2013 . Rodman Gilbert B. 1996. Elvis After Elvis The Posthumous Career of a Living Legend . Routledge. ISBN 978-0-415-11002-0 . Rodman Gilbert B. 2013. Elvis After Elvis The Posthumous Career of a Living Legend . Taylor Francis. ISBN 978-1-136-15506-2 . Rogers Dave 1982. Rock n Roll . Routledge Kegan Paul. ISBN 978-0-7100-0938-8 . The Immortals: The First Fifty . Rolling Stone . April 15 2004. Archived from the original on June 25 2008 . Retrieved December 29 2009 . 1969 Rolling Stone Covers . Rolling Stone . 2009. Archived from the original on July 5 2008 . Retrieved November 20 2015 . The 200 Greatest Singers of All Time . Rolling Stone . January 1 2023. Archived from the original on October 24 2023 . Retrieved October 11 2023 . Rose Lacey October 24 2006. Top-Earning Dead Celebrities . Forbes . Archived from the original on December 8 2012 . Retrieved June 5 2011 . Rose Lacey; Pomerantz Dorothy; Greenburg Zack OMalley; Paine Jake October 25 2010. In Pictures: The 13 Top-Earning Dead Celebs No. 2 Elvis Presley . Forbes . Archived from the original on July 30 2012 . Retrieved June 5 2011 . Sadie Stanley ed. 1994. The NortonGrove Concise Encyclopedia of Music Revised ed.. W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393-03753-1 . Salisbury Harrison February 3 1957. Presley Records a Craze in Soviet . The New York Times . Scherman Tony August 16 2006. Elvis Dies . American Heritage . Archived from the original on October 8 2023 . Retrieved December 29 2009 . Segre Gabriel 2002. Le rite de la Candlelight . Ethnologie francaise . 32 : 149. doi : 10.3917ethn.021.0149 . ISSN 0046-2616 . Sexton Paul August 3 2007. New Presley Reissue Campaign Aimed at U.K. Billboard . Archived from the original on May 10 2018 . Retrieved January 21 2018 . Sexton Paul October 28 2016. The King Reigns Again as Elvis Presley Takes U.K. Album Honors . Billboard . Archived from the original on November 11 2021 . Retrieved January 20 2018 . Slater Nigel August 11 2002. Grease Is the Word . The Guardian . Archived from the original on January 21 2018 . Retrieved January 20 2018 . Slaughter Todd; Nixon Anne E. 2004. The Elvis Archives . Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-1-84449-380-7 . Smith Liz November 10 2002. Aint Nothin but a Chow Hound . The New York Times . Archived from the original on August 24 2023 . Retrieved January 20 2018 . Speakman Kimberlee January 13 2023. Elvis Presleys Former Fiancee Ginger Alden Pays Tribute to Lisa Marie: You Were Loved . People . Stanley David; Coffey Frank 1998. The Elvis Encyclopedia . Virgin Books. ISBN 978-0-7535-0293-8 . Stein Ruthe August 3 1997. Girls! Girls! Girls! . SFGate . Archived from the original on August 30 2023 . Retrieved December 29 2009 . Szatmary David 1996. A Time to Rock: A Social History of Rock n Roll . Schirmer Books. ISBN 978-0-02-864670-1 . Tasker Yvonne 2007. Cowgirl Tales . In Codell Julie F. ed.. Genre Gender Race and World Cinema: An Anthology . Blackwell. ISBN 978-1-4051-3232-9 . Tennant Forest June 2013. Elvis Presley: Head Trauma Autoimmunity Pain and Early Death . Practical Pain Management . Archived from the original on October 28 2021 . Retrieved January 9 2018 . Tillery Gary 2013. The Seeker King: A Spiritual Biography of Elvis Presley . Quest Books. ISBN 978-0-8356-0915-9 . Archived from the original on March 21 2024 . Retrieved February 2 2018 . Trust Gary January 8 2015. Elvis Presleys Billboard Chart Records . Billboard . Archived from the original on April 5 2023 . Retrieved April 5 2023 . Trust Gary January 1 2019. Elvis Presley Earns Highest-Charting Billboard Hot 100 Hit Since 1981 as Blue Christmas Jingles In at No. 40 . Billboard . Archived from the original on January 1 2019 . Retrieved July 1 2019 . Trust Gary June 27 2022. Drake 21 Savages Jimmy Cooks Soars in at No. 1 on Billboard Hot 100 . Billboard . Archived from the original on July 1 2022 . Retrieved March 19 2023 . Trust Gary January 3 2023. Mariah Careys All I Want for Christmas Is You Adds 12th Week Atop Hot 100 Nat King Cole Hits Top 10 . Billboard . Archived from the original on January 3 2023 . Retrieved March 19 2023 . Turner John Frayn 2004. Frank Sinatra . Taylor Trade Publications. ISBN 978-1-58979-145-9 . Presley Elvis Aron; DD 214: Armed Forces of the United States Report of Transfer or Discharge . United States Department of Defense . March 5 1960. 100 Icons of the Century . Variety . 2005. Archived from the original on December 30 2009 . Retrieved December 29 2009 . 100 Greatest Artists of Rock Roll . VH1. 1998. Archived from the original on November 19 2019 . Retrieved December 29 2009 . Victor Adam 2008. The Elvis Encyclopedia . Overlook Duckworth. ISBN 978-1-58567-598-2 . Wadey Paul January 8 2004. Jake Hess . The Independent . Archived from the original on July 13 2010. Walker Howard January 9 2023. Elvis Presleys Dilapidated Private Jet Sat in the Desert for 40 Years. It Just Sold for 260 000 . Robb Report . Archived from the original on February 16 2024 . Retrieved February 16 2024 . Warwick Neil; Kutner Jon; Brown Tony 2004. The Complete Book of the British Charts: Singles Albums 3rd ed.. Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-1-84449-058-5 . Waters Lindsay Spring 2003. Come Softly Darling Hear What I Say: Listening in a State of Distraction A Tribute to the Work of Walter Benjamin Elvis Presley and Robert Christgau . Boundary 2 . 30 : 199212. doi : 10.121501903659-30-1-199 . S2CID 161635612 . Archived from the original on May 18 2022 . Retrieved February 25 2017 . Whitburn Joel 1993. Billboard Top 1000 Singles 19551992 . Billboard Books. ISBN 978-0-7935-2072-5 . Whitburn Joel 2006. The Billboard Book of Top 40 Country Hits 2nd ed.. Billboard Books. ISBN 978-0-8230-8291-9 . Whitburn Joel 2010. The Billboard Book of Top 40 Hits 9th ed.. Billboard Books. ISBN 978-0-8230-8554-5 . Williams Todd August 20 2012. Why I Stopped Hating Elvis Presley . Creative Loafing . Archived from the original on July 4 2016 . Retrieved January 20 2018 . Williamson Joel 2015. Elvis Presley: A Southern Life . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-986317-4 . Wilson Bee 2010. Sandwich: A Global History . Reaktion. ISBN 978-1-86189-771-8 . Wolfe Charles 1994. Amazing Grace: His Greatest Sacred Performances . CD Booklet RCABMG. UPC 7863664212. Woolley John T.; Peters Gerhard August 17 1977. Jimmy Carter: Death of Elvis Presley Statement by the President . American Presidency Project . University of California Santa Barbara. Archived from the original on March 21 2024 . Retrieved May 15 2021 . Further reading Allen Lew 2007. Elvis and the Birth of Rock . Genesis. ISBN 978-1-905662-00-5 . Bennet Mark August 15 2017. Elvis impersonator reviews his career highlights wardrobe . Daily Herald . Archived from the original on May 4 2018 . Retrieved February 2 2018 . Elvis Presley: Chart History Classical Albums . Billboard . 2018. Archived from the original on May 7 2018 . Retrieved January 9 2018 . Bloom Nate 2010. The Jews Who Wrote Christmas Songs . 18Doors . Archived from the original on November 9 2011 . Retrieved February 6 2011 . Cantor Louis 2005. Dewey and Elvis: The Life and Times of a Rock n Roll Deejay . University of Illinois Press. ISBN 978-0-252-02981-3 . Dickerson James L. 2001. Colonel Tom Parker: The Curious Life of Elvis Presleys Eccentric Manager . Cooper Square Press. ISBN 978-0-8154-1267-0 . Gatto Kimberly; Racimo Victoria 2017. All the Kings Horses: the Equestrian Life of Elvis Presley . Regnery History. ISBN 978-1-62157-603-7 . Goldman Albert 1981. Elvis. McGraw-Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-023657-8 . Goldman Albert 1990. Elvis: The Last 24 Hours. St. Martins. ISBN 978-0-312-92541-3 . Klein George 2010. Elvis: My Best Man: Radio Days Rock n Roll Nights and My Lifelong Friendship with Elvis Presley . Virgin Books. ISBN 978-0-307-45274-0 Marcus Greil 1991. Dead Elvis: A Chronicle of a Cultural Obsession . Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-41718-1 . Marcus Greil 2000. Double Trouble: Bill Clinton and Elvis Presley in a Land of No Alternative . Picador. ISBN 978-0-571-20676-6 . Mawer Sharon 2007a. Album Chart History 1974 . Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on December 17 2007 . Retrieved February 1 2010 . Mawer Sharon 2007b. Album Chart History 1977 . Official Charts Company. Archived from the original on April 15 2008 . Retrieved February 1 2010 . Nash Alanna 2010. Baby Lets Play House: Elvis Presley and the Women Who Loved Him . It Books. ISBN 978-0-06-169984-9 . Roy Samuel 1985. Elvis: Prophet of Power . Branden ISBN 978-0-8283-1898-3 . Southern Genealogy Yields Surprises . Voice of America. October 27 2009. Archived from the original on April 19 2016 . Retrieved January 19 2018 . Wertheimer Neil 1997. Total Health for Men . Rodale Press. Whitburn Joel 2007. Joel Whitburn Presents the Billboard Albums 6th ed.. Record Research. ISBN 978-0-89820-166-6 . Whitburn Joel 2008. Joel Whitburn Presents Hot Country Albums: Billboard 1964 to 2007 . Record Research. ISBN 978-0-89820-173-4 . Red West Sonny West and Dave Hebler as told to Steve Dunleavy 1977. Elvis: What Happened? Bantam Books. ISBN 978-0-345-27215-7 . External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Elvis Presley . Wikiquote has quotations related to Elvis Presley . Elvis Presley at Curlie Elvis Presley at IMDb Elvis Presley at the TCM Movie Database Elvis Presley at AllMovie Elvis The Music official record label site Elvis Presley Interviews on officially sanctioned Elvis Australia site The All American Boy: Enter Elvis and the Rock-a-billies episode of 1968 Pop Chronicles radio series v t e Elvis Presley Albums Singles Songs Films and television Personal relationships Cultural depictions Cultural impact Studio albums Elvis Presley Elvis 1956 album Elvis Christmas Album Elvis Is Back! His Hand in Mine Something for Everybody Pot Luck How Great Thou Art From Elvis in Memphis From Memphis to Vegas From Vegas to Memphis Thats the Way It Is Elvis Country Im 10 000 Years Old Love Letters from Elvis Elvis Sings The Wonderful World of Christmas Elvis Now He Touched Me Elvis 1973 album Raised on Rock For Ol Times Sake Good Times Promised Land Today From Elvis Presley Boulevard Memphis Tennessee Moody Blue Soundtrack albums Loving You King Creole G.I. Blues Blue Hawaii Girls! Girls! Girls! It Happened at the Worlds Fair Fun in Acapulco Kissin Cousins Roustabout Girl Happy Harum Scarum Frankie and Johnny Paradise Hawaiian Style Spinout Double Trouble Clambake Speedway Viva Elvis Elvis Presley: The Searcher EPs Love Me Tender Peace in the Valley Jailhouse Rock Flaming Star Follow That Dream Kid Galahad Viva Las Vegas Tickle Me Easy Come Easy Go Live albums Elvis 1968 album From Memphis to Vegas From Vegas to Memphis On Stage As Recorded at Madison Square Garden Aloha from Hawaii via Satellite Elvis Recorded Live on Stage in Memphis Having Fun with Elvis on Stage Elvis in Concert An Afternoon in the Garden Budget albums Elvis Sings Flaming Star Lets Be Friends Almost in Love Cmon Everybody I Got Lucky Elvis 40 Greatest Pure Gold Compilation albums Elvis Golden Records For LP Fans Only A Date with Elvis 50 000 000 Elvis Fans Cant Be Wrong Elvis Golden Records Volume 3 Elvis for Everyone! Elvis Gold Records Volume 4 Elvis: A Legendary Performer Volume 1 Elvis: A Legendary Performer Volume 2 The Sun Sessions Welcome to My World He Walks Beside Me Mahalo from Elvis Elvis: A Legendary Performer Volume 3 Greatest Hits Volume 1 Elvis Gold Records Volume 5 Amazing Grace: His Greatest Sacred Performances Command Performances: The Essential 60s Masters II Elvis 56 Tiger Man Memories: The 68 Comeback Special Sunrise Suspicious Minds: The Memphis 1969 Anthology The 50 Greatest Hits ELV1S: 30 1 Hits 2nd to None Elvis at Sun Hitstory Elvis Inspirational Elvis Rock Elvis Christmas The Essential Elvis Presley Christmas Duets If I Can Dream Way Down in the Jungle Room The Wonder of You Where No One Stands Alone Box sets Worldwide 50 Gold Award Hits Vol. 1 The King of Rock n Roll: The Complete 50s Masters From Nashville to Memphis: The Essential 60s Masters Walk a Mile in My Shoes: The Essential 70s Masters Peace in the Valley: The Complete Gospel Recordings Live in Las Vegas Today Tomorrow and Forever Elvis the King The Complete 68 Comeback Special The Complete Elvis Presley Masters Biographical media Elvis 1979 film Elvis and Me miniseries Elvis 1990 series Elvis Meets Nixon Elvis 2005 miniseries Elvis Nixon Elvis 2022 film Agent Elvis 2023 series Priscilla Documentaries The Pied Piper of Cleveland Elvis: Thats the Way It Is Elvis on Tour This Is Elvis The New Gladiators Elvis Presley: The Searcher TV specials The Frank Sinatra Timex Show: Welcome Home Elvis Elvis 68 Comeback Special Aloha from Hawaii via Satellite Elvis in Concert Stage shows Cooking with Elvis All Shook Up Elvis. The Musical Elvis: The Concert Viva Elvis The Elvis Dead Related people Lisa Marie Presley daughter Riley Keough granddaughter Priscilla Presley ex-wife Brandon Presley second cousin Sam Phillips The Blue Moon Boys The Jordanaires The Imperials The Sweet Inspirations TCB Band J. D. Sumner Stephen H. Sholes June Juanico Memphis Mafia Colonel Tom Parker George C. Nichopoulos Judy Spreckels Linda Thompson Ginger Alden Larry Geller Related articles Graceland Audubon Street House Impersonators Elvis and Gladys Elvis and Me Elvis: What Happened? Elvis-A-Rama Museum Sun recordings Million Dollar Quartet Cultural depictions of Elvis Presley Songs about Elvis Elvis Presley Enterprises Elvis Presley Lake Elvis has left the building Elvis Radio FBI files on Elvis Presley Military service Eight Elvises Triple Elvis Elvis Presleys Pink Cadillac Elvis Presleys guitars Elvis Presley single Elvis Presley Forever stamp Elvis sightings Elvis sandwich Fools Gold Loaf Elvis Greatest Shit List of memorials Category v t e Elvis Presley singles 1954 Thats All Right Blue Moon of Kentucky Good Rockin Tonight I Dont Care If the Sun Dont Shine Milkcow Blues Boogie Youre a Heartbreaker 1955 Im Left Youre Right Shes Gone Baby Lets Play House I Forgot to Remember to Forget Mystery Train 1956 Heartbreak Hotel I Was the One I Want You I Need You I Love You My Baby Left Me Dont Be Cruel Hound Dog Blue Suede Shoes Tutti Frutti Money Honey I Got a Woman Tryin to Get to You Blue Moon Ill Never Let You Go Little Darlin Im Gonna Sit Right Down and Cry over You Shake Rattle and Roll Lawdy Miss Clawdy Love Me Tender Any Way You Want Me 1957 Too Much Playing for Keeps All Shook Up Thats When Your Heartaches Begin Peace in the Valley Let Me Be Your Teddy Bear Loving You Paralyzed UK Jailhouse Rock Treat Me Nice Party Got a Lot o Livin to Do! UK 1958 Dont I Beg of You Wear My Ring Around Your Neck Doncha Think Its Time Hard Headed Woman Dont Ask Me Why King Creole UK One Night I Got Stung 1959 I Need Your Love Tonight A Fool Such as I A Big Hunk o Love My Wish Came True 1960 Stuck on You Fame and Fortune Its Now or Never A Mess of Blues Are You Lonesome Tonight? I Gotta Know 1961 Surrender Lonely Man I Feel So Bad Wild in the Country Maries the Name His Latest Flame Little Sister Cant Help Falling in Love Rock-A-Hula Baby 1962 Good Luck Charm Anything Thats Part of You Shes Not You Just Tell Her Jim Said Hello King of the Whole Wide World Return to Sender Where Do You Come From 1963 One Broken Heart for Sale They Remind Me Too Much of You Youre the Devil in Disguise Bossa Nova Baby Witchcraft 1964 Kissin Cousins It Hurts Me Kiss Me Quick Suspicion Viva Las Vegas Whatd I Say Such a Night Never Ending Ask Me Aint That Loving You Baby Blue Christmas 1965 Do the Clam Youll Be Gone Crying in the Chapel Such an Easy Question It Feels So Right Im Yours Its a Long Lonely Highway Puppet on a String Wooden Heart 1966 Tell Me Why Blue River Frankie and Johnny Please Dont Stop Loving Me Love Letters Spinout All That I Am If Every Day Was Like Christmas 1967 Indescribably Blue Fools Fall in Love You Gotta Stop The Love Machine UK Long Legged Girl with the Short Dress On Thats Someone You Never Forget Theres Always Me Judy Big Boss Man You Dont Know Me 1968 Guitar Man U.S. Male Stay Away We Call on Him Youll Never Walk Alone Your Time Hasnt Come Yet Baby Let Yourself Go Almost in Love A Little Less Conversation If I Can Dream Edge of Reality 1969 Memories Charro How Great Thou Art In the Ghetto Any Day Now Clean Up Your Own Backyard Suspicious Minds Youll Think of Me Dont Cry Daddy Rubberneckin 1970 Kentucky Rain The Wonder of You Mama Liked the Roses Ive Lost You The Next Step Is Love You Dont Have to Say You Love Me Patch It Up I Really Dont Want to Know There Goes My Everything 1971 Rags to Riches Life Only Believe Im Leavin Its Only Love The Sound of Your Cry Merry Christmas Baby O Come All Ye Faithful 1972 Until Its Time for You to Go We Can Make the Morning He Touched Me Bosom of Abraham An American Trilogy The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face Burning Love Its a Matter of Time Separate Ways Always on My Mind 1973 Steamroller Blues Fool Raised on Rock For Ol Times Sake 1974 Take Good Care of Her Ive Got a Thing About You Baby If You Talk in Your Sleep Help Me Promised Land Its Midnight 1975 My Boy Thinking About You T-R-O-U-B-L-E Bringing It Back Pieces of My Life 1976 For the Heart Hurt Moody Blue She Thinks I Still Care 1977 Way Down Pledging My Love My Way America the Beautiful 1978 Unchained Melody Softly as I Leave You Posthumous singles Puppet on a String Let Me Be Your Teddy Bear 1978 Are You Sincere Solitaire Theres a Honky Tonk Angel Wholl Take Me Back In I Got a Feelin in My Body Guitar Man Loving Arms You Asked Me To Youll Never Walk Alone There Goes My Everything 1982 The Elvis Medley I Was the One Wear My Ring Around Your Neck 1983 Heartbreak Hotel 1996 Blue Christmas 1998 A Little Less Conversation JXL remix Rubberneckin Paul Oakenfold Remix In the Ghetto with Lisa Marie Presley Baby Lets Play House Spankox Re:Version Ill Be Home for Christmas with Carrie Underwood 2008 Blue Christmas with Martina McBride 2008 Pocketful of Rainbows Spankox Remix I Love You Because with Lisa Marie Presley O Come All Ye Faithful with Susan Boyle I Got a Feelin in My Body Tommie Sunshine Wuki Remix Category Awards for Elvis Presley v t e American Music Award of Merit Bing Crosby 1974 Berry Gordy 1975 Irving Berlin 1976 Johnny Cash 1977 Ella Fitzgerald 1978 Perry Como 1979 Benny Goodman 1980 Chuck Berry 1981 Stevie Wonder 1982 Kenny Rogers 1983 Michael Jackson 1984 Loretta Lynn 1985 Paul McCartney 1986 Elvis Presley 1987 The Beach Boys 1988 Willie Nelson 1989 Neil Diamond 1990 Merle Haggard 1991 James Brown 1992 Bill Graham 1993 Whitney Houston 1994 Prince 1995 Tammy Wynette 1996 Little Richard 1997 Frank Sinatra 1998 Billy Joel 1999 Gloria Estefan 2000 Janet Jackson 2001 Garth Brooks 2002 Alabama 2003 Bon Jovi 2004 Annie Lennox 2008 Sting 2016 v t e Best-selling singles by year in the United Kingdom 1950s 1952: Here in My Heart Al Martino 1953: I Believe Frankie Laine 1954: Secret Love Doris Day 1955: Rose Marie Slim Whitman 1956: Ill Be Home Pat Boone 1957: Diana Paul Anka 1958: Jailhouse Rock Elvis Presley 1959: Living Doll Cliff Richard UK 1960s 1960: Its Now or Never Elvis Presley 1961: Wooden Heart Elvis Presley 1962: I Remember You Frank Ifield UK 1963: She Loves You The Beatles UK 1964: Cant Buy Me Love The Beatles UK 1965: Tears Ken Dodd UK 1966: Green Green Grass of Home Tom Jones UK 1967: Release Me Engelbert Humperdinck UK 1968: Hey Jude The Beatles UK 1969: Sugar Sugar The Archies 1970s 1970: The Wonder of You Elvis Presley In the Summertime Mungo Jerry UK 1971: My Sweet Lord George Harrison UK 1972: Amazing Grace Royal Scots Dragoon Guards UK 1973: Tie a Yellow Ribbon Round the Ole Oak Tree Dawn featuring Tony Orlando 1974: Tiger Feet Mud UK 1975: Bye Bye Baby Bay City Rollers UK 1976: Save Your Kisses for Me Brotherhood of Man UK 1977: Mull of Kintyre Girls School Wings UK 1978: Rivers of Babylon Brown Girl in the Ring Boney M. 1979: Bright Eyes Art Garfunkel 1980s 1980: Dont Stand So Close to Me The Police UK 1981: Tainted Love Soft Cell UK Dont You Want Me The Human League UK 1982: Come On Eileen Dexys Midnight Runners UK 1983: Karma Chameleon Culture Club UK 1984: Do They Know Its Christmas? Band Aid UK 1985: The Power of Love Jennifer Rush 1986: Dont Leave Me This Way The Communards UK 1987: Never Gonna Give You Up Rick Astley UK 1988: Mistletoe and Wine Cliff Richard UK 1989: Ride on Time Black Box 1990s 1990: Unchained Melody The Righteous Brothers 1991: Everything I Do I Do It for You Bryan Adams 1992: I Will Always Love You Whitney Houston 1993: Id Do Anything for Love But I Wont Do That Meat Loaf 1994: Love Is All Around Wet Wet Wet UK 1995: Unchained Melody Robson Jerome UK 1996: Killing Me Softly Fugees 1997: Something About the Way You Look Tonight Candle in the Wind 1997 Elton John UK 1998: Believe Cher 1999: ...Baby One More Time Britney Spears 2000s 2000: Can We Fix It? Bob the Builder UK 2001: It Wasnt Me Shaggy featuring Rikrok UK 2002: Anything Is Possible Evergreen Will Young UK 2003: Where Is the Love? Black Eyed Peas 2004: Do They Know Its Christmas? Band Aid 20 UK 2005: Is This the Way to Amarillo Tony Christie featuring Peter Kay UK 2006: Crazy Gnarls Barkley 2007: Bleeding Love Leona Lewis UK 2008: Hallelujah Alexandra Burke UK 2009: Poker Face Lady Gaga 2010s 2010: Love the Way You Lie Eminem featuring Rihanna 2011: Someone like You Adele UK 2012: Somebody That I Used to Know Gotye featuring Kimbra 2013: Blurred Lines Robin Thicke featuring T.I. Pharrell Williams 2014: Happy Pharrell Williams 2015: Uptown Funk Mark Ronson UK featuring Bruno Mars 2016: One Dance Drake featuring Wizkid and Kyla UK 2017: Shape of You Ed Sheeran UK 2018: One Kiss Calvin Harris and Dua Lipa UK 2019: Someone You Loved Lewis Capaldi UK 2020s 2020: Blinding Lights The Weeknd 2021: Bad Habits Ed Sheeran UK 2022: As It Was Harry Styles UK 2023: Flowers Miley Cyrus v t e Country Music Hall of Fame 1990s Tennessee Ernie Ford 1990 Felice and Boudleaux Bryant 1991 George Jones 1992 Frances Preston 1992 Willie Nelson 1993 Merle Haggard 1994 Roger Miller 1995 Jo Walker-Meador 1995 Patsy Montana 1996 Buck Owens 1996 Ray Price 1996 Harlan Howard 1997 Brenda Lee 1997 Cindy Walker 1997 George Morgan 1998 Elvis Presley 1998 E.W. Bud Wendell 1998 Tammy Wynette 1998 Johnny Bond 1999 Dolly Parton 1999 Conway Twitty 1999 v t e Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award 19631990 1963 Bing Crosby 1965 Frank Sinatra 1966 Duke Ellington 1967 Ella Fitzgerald 1968 Irving Berlin 1971 Elvis Presley 1972 Louis Armstrong Mahalia Jackson 1984 Chuck Berry Charlie Parker 1985 Leonard Bernstein 1986 Benny Goodman The Rolling Stones Andres Segovia 1987 Roy Acuff Benny Carter Enrico Caruso Ray Charles Fats Domino Woody Herman Billie Holiday B.B. King Isaac Stern Igor Stravinsky Arturo Toscanini Hank Williams 1989 Fred Astaire Pablo Casals Dizzy Gillespie Jascha Heifetz Lena Horne Leontyne Price Bessie Smith Art Tatum Sarah Vaughan 1990 Nat King Cole Miles Davis Vladimir Horowitz Paul McCartney 19912000 1991 Marian Anderson Bob Dylan John Lennon Kitty Wells 1992 James Brown John Coltrane Jimi Hendrix Muddy Waters 1993 Chet Atkins Little Richard Thelonious Monk Bill Monroe Pete Seeger Fats Waller 1994 Bill Evans Aretha Franklin Arthur Rubinstein 1995 Patsy Cline Peggy Lee Henry Mancini Curtis Mayfield Barbra Streisand 1996 Dave Brubeck Marvin Gaye Georg Solti Stevie Wonder 1997 Bobby Blue Bland The Everly Brothers Judy Garland Stephane Grappelli Buddy Holly Charles Mingus Oscar Peterson Frank Zappa 1998 Bo Diddley The Mills Brothers Roy Orbison Paul Robeson 1999 Johnny Cash Sam Cooke Otis Redding Smokey Robinson Mel Torme 2000 Harry Belafonte Woody Guthrie John Lee Hooker Mitch Miller Willie Nelson 20012010 2001 The Beach Boys Tony Bennett Sammy Davis Jr. Bob Marley The Who 2002 Count Basie Rosemary Clooney Perry Como Al Green Joni Mitchell 2003 Etta James Johnny Mathis Glenn Miller Tito Puente Simon Garfunkel 2004 Van Cliburn The Funk Brothers Ella Jenkins Sonny Rollins Artie Shaw Doc Watson 2005 Eddy Arnold Art Blakey The Carter Family Morton Gould Janis Joplin Led Zeppelin Jerry Lee Lewis Jelly Roll Morton Pinetop Perkins The Staple Singers 2006 David Bowie Cream Merle Haggard Robert Johnson Jessye Norman Richard Pryor The Weavers 2007 Joan Baez Booker T. the M.G.s Maria Callas Ornette Coleman The Doors The Grateful Dead Bob Wills 2008 Burt Bacharach The Band Cab Calloway Doris Day Itzhak Perlman Max Roach Earl Scruggs 2009 Gene Autry The Blind Boys of Alabama The Four Tops Hank Jones Brenda Lee Dean Martin Tom Paxton 2010 Leonard Cohen Bobby Darin David Honeyboy Edwards Michael Jackson Loretta Lynn Andre Previn Clark Terry 20112020 2011 Julie Andrews Roy Haynes Juilliard String Quartet The Kingston Trio Dolly Parton Ramones George Beverly Shea 2012 The Allman Brothers Band Glen Campbell Antonio Carlos Jobim George Jones The Memphis Horns Diana Ross Gil Scott-Heron 2013 Glenn Gould Charlie Haden Lightnin Hopkins Carole King Patti Page Ravi Shankar The Temptations 2014 The Beatles Clifton Chenier The Isley Brothers Kraftwerk Kris Kristofferson Armando Manzanero Maud Powell 2015 Bee Gees Pierre Boulez Buddy Guy George Harrison Flaco Jimenez The Louvin Brothers Wayne Shorter 2016 Ruth Brown Celia Cruz Earth Wind Fire Herbie Hancock Jefferson Airplane Linda Ronstadt Run-DMC 2017 Shirley Caesar Ahmad Jamal Charley Pride Jimmie Rodgers Nina Simone Sly Stone The Velvet Underground 2018 Hal Blaine Neil Diamond Emmylou Harris Louis Jordan The Meters Queen Tina Turner 2019 Black Sabbath George Clinton and Parliament-Funkadelic Billy Eckstine Donny Hathaway Julio Iglesias Sam Dave Dionne Warwick 2020 Chicago Roberta Flack Isaac Hayes Iggy Pop John Prine Public Enemy Sister Rosetta Tharpe 2021present 2021 Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five Lionel Hampton Marilyn Horne Salt-N-Pepa Selena Talking Heads 2022 Bonnie Raitt 2023 Bobby McFerrin Nirvana Ma Rainey Slick Rick Nile Rodgers The Supremes Ann Wilson and Nancy Wilson 2024 Laurie Anderson The Clark Sisters Gladys Knight N.W.A Donna Summer Tammy Wynette v t e Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Class of 1986 Performers Chuck Berry James Brown Ray Charles Sam Cooke Fats Domino The Everly Brothers Don Everly Phil Everly Buddy Holly Jerry Lee Lewis Little Richard Elvis Presley Early influences Robert Johnson Jimmie Rodgers Jimmy Yancey Non-performers Ahmet Ertegun Award Alan Freed Sam Phillips Lifetime achievement John Hammond Portals : 1950s Biography Film Mississippi Pop music Rock music Rhythm and blues Television Tennessee United States Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF FAST 2 WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Russia Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz Grammy Awards People BMLO Trove Deutsche Biographie Deutsche Synchronkartei Other IdRef NARA SNAC 2 RISM Retrieved from https:en.wikipedia.orgwindex.php?titleElvisPresleyoldid1250329619 Categories : Elvis Presley 1935 births 1950s in American music 1977 deaths 20th-century American male actors 20th-century American singers 20th-century Protestants Accidental deaths in Tennessee Activists for African-American civil rights Activists from Mississippi Activists from Tennessee American baritones American blues singers American car collectors American country singers American gospel singers American Kenpo practitioners American male film actors American male karateka American male singers American performers of Christian music American philanthropists American rhythm and blues singers American rock singers American rockabilly musicians American twins American ballad musicians Blues musicians from Mississippi Blues musicians from Tennessee Burials in Tennessee Country Music Hall of Fame inductees Country musicians from Mississippi Country musicians from Tennessee Deaths from cardiomyopathy Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award winners Harrison family of Virginia Humes High School alumni Las Vegas shows Male actors from Hesse Male actors from Memphis Tennessee Male actors from Mississippi Male Western genre film actors Military personnel from Mississippi Military personnel from Tennessee Military personnel of the Cold War Mississippi Blues Trail Musicians from Las Vegas Musicians from Palm Springs California Obscenity controversies in music Paramount Pictures contract players Pentecostals from Mississippi Pentecostals from Tennessee People associated with firearms People from Bad Nauheim People from Tupelo Mississippi Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients Presley family Priscilla Presley RCA Victor artists Rock and roll musicians Singers from Memphis Tennessee Singers from Mississippi Southern gospel performers Sun Records artists Tank personnel Traditional pop music singers Twin musicians United States Army non-commissioned officers World record holders Westgate Las Vegas Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Featured articles Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use American English from March 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from March 2024 Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Biography with signature Pages using infobox military person with embed Articles with hAudio microformats Articles containing Neapolitan-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2023 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata TCMDb name template using non-numeric ID from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 October 2024 at 19:41 UTC . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view