George Washington - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Donate Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 1 Early life 17321752 2 Colonial military career 17521758 Toggle Colonial military career 17521758 subsection 2.1 French and Indian War 3 Marriage civilian and political life 17551775 Toggle Marriage civilian and political life 17551775 subsection 3.1 Opposition to the British Parliament and Crown 4 Commander in chief 17751783 Toggle Commander in chief 17751783 subsection 4.1 Siege of Boston 4.2 New York and New Jersey 4.2.1 Battle of Long Island 4.2.2 Crossing the Delaware Trenton and Princeton 4.3 Philadelphia 4.3.1 Brandywine Germantown and Saratoga 4.3.2 Valley Forge and Monmouth 4.4 West Point espionage 4.5 Southern theater and Yorktown 4.5.1 Yorktown 4.6 Demobilization and resignation 5 Early republic 17831789 Toggle Early republic 17831789 subsection 5.1 Return to Mount Vernon 5.2 Constitutional Convention of 1787 5.3 Chancellor of William Mary 5.4 First presidential election 6 Presidency 17891797 Toggle Presidency 17891797 subsection 6.1 Cabinet and executive departments 6.2 Domestic issues 6.2.1 African Americans 6.2.2 National Bank 6.2.3 JeffersonHamilton feud 6.2.4 Whiskey Rebellion 6.3 Foreign affairs 6.4 Native American affairs 6.5 Second term 6.6 Farewell Address 7 Post-presidency 17971799 Toggle Post-presidency 17971799 subsection 7.1 Retirement 7.2 Final days and death 8 Burial net worth and aftermath 9 Personal life Toggle Personal life subsection 9.1 Religious and spiritual views 9.2 Slavery 9.2.1 Washingtons slaves 9.2.2 Abolition and manumission 10 Historical reputation and legacy Toggle Historical reputation and legacy subsection 10.1 Places namesakes and monuments 10.2 Currency and postage 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References 14 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 14.1 Book sources 14.2 Miscellaneous 15 Further reading 16 External links Toggle the table of contents George Washington 202 languages Aceh Afrikaans Alemannisch nglisc Aragones Arpetan Asturianu Avanee Aymar aru Azrbaycanca Basa Bali Banjar Ban-lam-gu Bikol Central Bislama Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Catala Cebuano Cestina Chi-Chewa ChiTumbuka Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Emilian e rumagnol Espanol Esperanto Euskara Fiji Hindi Froyskt Francais Frysk Gaeilge Gaidhlig Galego Hak-ka-ngi Hausa Hawaii Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Bahasa Hulontalo Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Islenska Italiano Jawa Kaby Kapampangan Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Kiswahili Kreyol ayisyen Kurdi Latina Latviesu Letzebuergesch Lietuviu Ligure Limburgs Lingala Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Lombard Magyar Malagasy Malti Maori Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Ming-deng-ngu Nahuatl Nederlands Nordfriisk Norsk bokmal Norsk nynorsk Occitan Ozbekcha Pangcah Papiamentu Patois Piemonteis Plattduutsch Polski Portugues Qaraqalpaqsha Qrmtatarca Ripoarisch Romana Romani chib Runa Simi Sakizaya Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovencina Slovenscina Soomaaliga Sranantongo srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Svenska Tagalog Taqbaylit tatarca Turkce Turkmence Uyghurche Veneto Vepsan kel Tieng Viet Volapuk West-Vlams Winaray Yoruba Zazaki Zemaiteska Betawi Batak Mandailing Tolsi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Founding Father and first United States president General Washington redirects here. For other uses see General Washington disambiguation and George Washington disambiguation . George Washington Portrait c. 1803 1st President of the United States In office April 30 1789 March 4 1797 Vice President John Adams Preceded by Office established Succeeded by John Adams 7th Senior Officer of the United States Army In office July 13 1798 December 14 1799 President John Adams Preceded by James Wilkinson Succeeded by Alexander Hamilton Commander in Chief of the Continental Army In office June 19 1775 December 23 1783 Appointed by Continental Congress Preceded by Office established Succeeded by Henry Knox as Senior Officer 14th Chancellor of the College of William Mary In office April 30 1788 December 14 1799 President James Madison Preceded by Richard Terrick 1776 Succeeded by John Tyler 1859 Delegate from Virginia to the Continental Congress In office September 5 1774 June 16 1775 Preceded by Office established Succeeded by Thomas Jefferson Member of the Virginia House of Burgesses In office July 24 1758 June 24 1775 Preceded by Hugh West Succeeded by Office abolished Constituency Frederick County 17581765 Fairfax County 17651775 Personal details Born February 22 1732 O.S. February 11 1731 Popes Creek Virginia Colony British America Died December 14 1799 1799-12-14 aged 67 Mount Vernon Virginia U.S. Resting place Mount Vernon Virginia 384228.4N 770509.9W 38.707889N 77.086083W 38.707889; -77.086083 Political party Independent Spouse Martha Dandridge m. 1759 Parents Augustine Washington Mary Ball Washington Relatives Washington family Occupation Farmer military officer statesman surveyor Awards Congressional Gold Medal Thanks of Congress 1 Signature Military service Allegiance Great Britain United States Branchservice Virginia Militia Continental Army United States Army Years of service 17521758 Virginia Militia 17751783 Continental Army 17981799 U.S. Army Rank Colonel 1st Virginia Regiment Colonel Virginia Militia General and Commander in Chief Continental Army Lieutenant General U.S. Army General of the Armies promoted posthumously in 1976 by Congress Commands Virginia Regiment Continental Army United States Army Battleswars See list French and Indian War Battle of Jumonville Glen Battle of Fort Necessity Braddock Expedition Battle of the Monongahela Forbes Expedition American Revolutionary War Boston campaign New York and New Jersey campaign Philadelphia campaign Yorktown campaign Northwest Indian War Whiskey Rebellion George Washington February 22 1732 December 14 1799 was a Founding Father of the United States military officer and farmer who served as the first president of the United States from 1789 to 1797. Appointed by the Second Continental Congress as commander of the Continental Army in 1775 Washington led Patriot forces to victory in the American Revolutionary War and then served as president of the Constitutional Convention in 1787 which drafted the current Constitution of the United States . Washington has thus become commonly known as the Father of his Country . Washingtons first public office from 1749 to 1750 was as surveyor of Culpeper County in the Colony of Virginia . In 1752 he received military training and was granted the rank of major in the Virginia Regiment . During the French and Indian War Washington was promoted to lieutenant colonel in 1754 and subsequently became head of the Virginia Regiment in 1755. He was later elected to the Virginia House of Burgesses and was named a delegate to the Continental Congress in Philadelphia which appointed him commander-in-chief of the Continental Army . Washington led American forces to a decisive victory over the British in the Revolutionary War leading the British to sign the Treaty of Paris which acknowledged the sovereignty and independence of the United States. He resigned his commission in 1783 after the conclusion of the Revolutionary War. Washington played an indispensable role in adopting and ratifying the Constitution which replaced the Articles of Confederation in 1789. He was then twice elected president unanimously by the Electoral College in 1788 and 1792. As the first U.S. president Washington implemented a strong well-financed national government while remaining impartial in a fierce rivalry that emerged between cabinet members Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton . During the French Revolution he proclaimed a policy of neutrality while additionally sanctioning the Jay Treaty . He set enduring precedents for the office of president including republicanism a peaceful transfer of power the use of the title Mr. President and the two-term tradition . His 1796 farewell address became a preeminent statement on republicanism in which he wrote about the importance of national unity and the dangers that regionalism partisanship and foreign influence pose to it. Washingtons image is an icon of American culture . He has been memorialized by monuments a federal holiday various media depictions geographical locations including the national capital the State of Washington stamps and currency . In 1976 Washington was posthumously promoted to the rank of general of the Armies the highest rank in the U.S. Army . Washington consistently ranks in both popular and scholarly polls as one of the greatest presidents in American history. Early life 17321752 Further information: Washington family and British America Ferry Farm the Washington family residence on the Rappahannock River in Stafford County Virginia where Washington spent much of his youth George Washington was born on February 22 1732 a at Popes Creek in Westmoreland County Virginia . 3 He was the first of six children of Augustine and Mary Ball Washington . 4 His father was a justice of the peace and a prominent public figure who had four additional children from his first marriage to Jane Butler. 5 The family moved to Little Hunting Creek in 1734 before eventually settling in Ferry Farm near Fredericksburg Virginia . When Augustine died in 1743 Washington inherited Ferry Farm and ten slaves; his older half-brother Lawrence inherited Little Hunting Creek and renamed it Mount Vernon . 6 7 Washington did not have the formal education his elder brothers received at Appleby Grammar School in England but he did attend the Lower Church School in Hartfield . He learned mathematics including trigonometry and land surveying and became a talented draftsman and mapmaker . By early adulthood he was writing with considerable force and precision . 8 As a teenager to practice his penmanship Washington compiled over a hundred rules for social interaction styled Rules of Civility and Decent Behaviour in Company and Conversation copied from an English translation of a French book of manners. 9 Washington often visited Mount Vernon and Belvoir the plantation of William Fairfax Lawrences father-in-law. Fairfax became Washingtons patron and surrogate father. In 1748 Washington spent a month with a team surveying Fairfaxs Shenandoah Valley property. 10 The following year he received a surveyors license from the College of William Mary . b Even though Washington had not served the customary apprenticeship Thomas Fairfax appointed him surveyor of Culpeper County Virginia where he took his oath of office on July 20 1749. He subsequently familiarized himself with the frontier region and though he resigned from the job in 1750 he continued to do surveys west of the Blue Ridge Mountains . 11 By 1752 he had bought almost 1 500 acres 600 ha in the Valley and owned 2 315 acres 937 ha. 12 In 1751 Washington left mainland North America for the first and only time when he accompanied Lawrence to Barbados hoping the climate would cure his brothers tuberculosis. 13 14 Washington contracted smallpox during that trip which left his face slightly scarred. 15 Lawrence died in 1752 and Washington leased Mount Vernon from his widow Anne; he inherited it outright after her death in 1761. 16 Colonial military career 17521758 Lawrence Washingtons service as adjutant general of the Virginia militia inspired George to seek a commission. Virginias lieutenant governor Robert Dinwiddie appointed Washington as a major and commander of one of the four militia districts. The British and French were competing for control of the Ohio Valley : the British were constructing forts along the Ohio River and the French between the Ohio River and Lake Erie . 17 In October 1753 Dinwiddie appointed Washington as a special envoy. He had sent Washington to demand French forces to vacate land that was claimed by the British. Washington was also appointed to make peace with the Iroquois Confederacy and to gather further intelligence about the French forces. 18 Washington met with Half-King Tanacharison and other Iroquois chiefs at Logstown and gathered information about the numbers and locations of the French forts as well as intelligence concerning individuals taken prisoner by the French. Washington was nicknamed Conotocaurius by Tanacharison. The name meaning devourer of villages had been given to his great-grandfather John Washington in the late 17th century by the Susquehannock . 19 Washingtons party reached the Ohio River in November 1753 and was intercepted by a French patrol. The party was escorted to Fort Le Boeuf where Washington was received in a friendly manner. He delivered the British demand to vacate to the French commander Saint-Pierre but the French refused to leave. Saint-Pierre gave Washington his official answer after a few days delay as well as food and winter clothing for his partys journey back to Virginia. 20 Washington completed the precarious mission in 77 days in difficult winter conditions achieving a measure of distinction when his report was published in Virginia and London. 21 French and Indian War Main article: George Washington in the French and Indian War Further information: French and Indian War and Seven Years War An 1855 engraving of then Lieutenant Colonel Washington holding night council during the Battle of Fort Necessity in Fayette County Pennsylvania In February 1754 Dinwiddie promoted Washington to lieutenant colonel and second-in-command of the 300-strong Virginia Regiment with orders to confront French forces at the Forks of the Ohio . 22 Washington set out with half the regiment in April and soon learned a French force of 1 000 had begun construction of Fort Duquesne there. In May having set up a defensive position at Great Meadows he learned that the French had made camp seven miles 11 km away; he decided to take the offensive. 23 The French detachment proved to be only about 50 men so Washington advanced on May 28 with a small force of Virginians and Indian allies to ambush them. c 25 During the ambush French forces were killed outright with muskets and hatchets including French commander Joseph Coulon de Jumonville who had been carrying a diplomatic message for the British. The French later found their countrymen dead and scalped blaming Washington who had retreated to Fort Necessity. 26 The full Virginia Regiment joined Washington at Fort Necessity the following month with news that he had been promoted to command of the regiment and colonel upon the regimental commanders death. The regiment was reinforced by an independent company of a hundred South Carolinians led by Captain James Mackay ; his royal commission outranked Washingtons and a conflict of command ensued. On July 3 a French force attacked with 900 men and the ensuing battle ended in Washingtons surrender. 27 He signed a surrender document in which he unwittingly took responsibility for assassinating Jumonville later blaming the translator for not properly translating it. 28 In the aftermath Colonel James Innes took command of intercolonial forces the Virginia Regiment was divided and Washington was offered a captaincy in one of the newly formed regiments. He refused however as it would have been a demotion and instead resigned his commission. 29 The Jumonville affair became the incident which ignited the French and Indian War later to become part of the Seven Years War . 30 31 Washington the Soldier an 1834 portrait of Washington on horseback during the Battle of the Monongahela In 1755 Washington served voluntarily as an aide to General Edward Braddock who led a British expedition to expel the French from Fort Duquesne and the Ohio Country . 32 On Washingtons recommendation Braddock split the army into one main column and a lightly equipped flying column . 33 Suffering from severe dysentery Washington was left behind and when he rejoined Braddock at Monongahela the French and their Indian allies ambushed the divided army. Two-thirds of the British force became casualties including the mortally wounded Braddock. Under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Gage Washington still very ill rallied the survivors and formed a rear guard allowing the remnants of the force to disengage and retreat. 34 During the engagement he had two horses shot from under him and his hat and coat were bullet-pierced. 35 His conduct under fire redeemed his reputation among critics of his command in the Battle of Fort Necessity 36 but he was not included by the succeeding commander Colonel Thomas Dunbar in planning subsequent operations. 37 The Virginia Regiment was reconstituted in August 1755 and Dinwiddie appointed Washington its commander again with the rank of colonel. Washington clashed over seniority almost immediately this time with John Dagworthy another captain of superior royal rank who commanded a detachment of Marylanders at the regiments headquarters in Fort Cumberland . 38 Washington impatient for an offensive against Fort Duquesne was convinced Braddock would have granted him a royal commission and pressed his case in February 1756 with Braddocks successor as Commander-in-Chief William Shirley and again in January 1757 with Shirleys successor Lord Loudoun . Shirley ruled in Washingtons favor only in the matter of Dagworthy; Loudoun humiliated Washington refused him a royal commission and agreed only to relieve him of the responsibility of manning Fort Cumberland. 39 In 1758 the Virginia Regiment was assigned to the British Forbes Expedition to capture Fort Duquesne. d 41 Washington disagreed with General John Forbes tactics and chosen route. 42 Forbes nevertheless made Washington a brevet brigadier general and gave him command of one of the three brigades that would assault the fort. The French had abandoned the fort and the valley before the assault however and Washington only saw a friendly fire incident which left 14 dead and 26 injured. Frustrated he resigned his commission soon afterwards and returned to Mount Vernon. 43 Under Washington the Virginia Regiment had defended 300 miles 480 km of frontier against twenty Indian attacks in ten months. 44 He increased the professionalism of the regiment as it grew from 300 to 1 000 men and Virginias frontier population suffered less than other colonies. Though he failed to realize a royal commission he gained self-confidence leadership skills and knowledge of British military tactics. The destructive competition Washington witnessed among colonial politicians fostered his later support of a strong central government. 45 Marriage civilian and political life 17551775 Main article: George Washingtons political evolution Colonel George Washington a 1772 portrait by Charles Willson Peale Martha Dandridge Custis a 1757 portrait by John Wollaston On January 6 1759 Washington at age 26 married Martha Dandridge Custis the 27-year-old widow of wealthy plantation owner Daniel Parke Custis . The marriage took place at Marthas estate; she was intelligent gracious and experienced in managing a planters estate and the couple had a happy marriage. 46 They moved to Mount Vernon near Alexandria where he lived as a planter of tobacco and wheat and emerged as a political figure. 47 Washingtons 1751 bout with smallpox is thought to have rendered him sterile though it is equally likely that Martha may have sustained injury during the birth of Patsy her final child making additional births impossible. 48 The couple lamented not having any children together. e 51 Despite this the two raised Marthas two children John Parke Custis Jacky and Martha Parke Custis Patsy and later Jackys two youngest children Eleanor Parke Custis Nelly and George Washington Parke Custis Washy along with numerous nieces and nephews. 52 The marriage gave Washington control over Marthas one-third dower interest in the 18 000-acre 7 300 ha Custis estate and he managed the remaining two-thirds for Marthas children; the estate also included 84 slaves. As a result he became one of the wealthiest men in Virginia which increased his social standing. 53 At Washingtons urging Governor Lord Botetourt fulfilled Dinwiddies 1754 promise of land bounties to all-volunteer militia during the French and Indian War. 54 In late 1770 Washington inspected the lands in the Ohio and Great Kanawha regions and he engaged surveyor William Crawford to subdivide it. Crawford allotted 23 200 acres 9 400 ha to Washington; Washington told the veterans that their land was hilly and unsuitable for farming and he agreed to purchase 20 147 acres 8 153 ha leaving some feeling they had been duped. 55 He also doubled the size of Mount Vernon to 6 500 acres 2 600 ha and by 1775 had increased its slave population by more than a hundred. 56 As a respected military hero and large landowner Washington held local offices and was elected to the Virginia provincial legislature representing Frederick County in the House of Burgesses for seven years beginning in 1758. 56 He first ran for the seat in 1755 but was soundly beaten by Hugh West. 57 58 When he ran in 1758 Washington plied voters with beer brandy and other beverages. Despite being away serving on the Forbes Expedition he won the election with roughly 40 percent of the vote defeating three opponents with the help of local supporters. 59 60 Early in his legislative career Washington rarely spoke or even attended legislative sessions. He would later become a prominent critic of Britains taxation policy and mercantilist policies towards the American colonies and became more politically active starting in the 1760s. 61 Washington imported luxuries and other goods from England paying for them by exporting tobacco. His profligate spending combined with low tobacco prices left him 1 800 in debt by 1764 prompting him to diversify his holdings. 62 In 1765 because of erosion and other soil problems he changed Mount Vernons primary cash crop from tobacco to wheat and expanded operations to include corn flour milling and fishing. 63 64 Washington soon was counted among the political and social elite in Virginia. From 1768 to 1775 he invited some 2 000 guests to Mount Vernon mostly those whom he considered people of rank and was known to be exceptionally cordial toward guests. 65 Washington also took time for leisure with fox hunting fishing dances theater cards backgammon and billiards. 66 Washingtons stepdaughter Patsy suffered from epileptic attacks from age 12 and she died at Mount Vernon in 1773. The following day he wrote to Burwell Bassett : It is easier to conceive than to describe the distress of this Family . 67 He canceled all business activity and remained with Martha every night for three months. 68 Opposition to the British Parliament and Crown Further information: American Revolution and George Washington in the American Revolution Washington played a central role before and during the American Revolution. His distrust of the British military had begun when he was passed over for promotion into the Regular Army. Opposed to taxes imposed by the British Parliament on the Colonies without proper representation 69 he and other colonists were also angered by the Royal Proclamation of 1763 which banned American settlement west of the Allegheny Mountains and protected the British fur trade . 70 Washington believed the Stamp Act 1765 was an Act of Oppression and celebrated its repeal the following year. f In March 1766 Parliament passed the Declaratory Act asserting that Parliamentary law superseded colonial law. 72 In the late 1760s the interference of the British Crown in American lucrative western land speculation spurred the American Revolution. 73 Washington was a prosperous land speculator and in 1767 he encouraged adventures to acquire backcountry western lands. 73 Washington helped lead widespread protests against the Townshend Acts passed by Parliament in 1767 and he introduced a proposal in May 1769 which urged Virginians to boycott British goods; the Acts were mostly repealed in 1770. 74 Parliament sought to punish Massachusetts colonists for their role in the Boston Tea Party in 1774 by passing the Coercive Acts which Washington saw as an invasion of our rights and privileges . 75 He said Americans must not submit to acts of tyranny since custom and use shall make us as tame and abject slaves as the blacks we rule over with such arbitrary sway . 76 That July he and George Mason drafted a list of resolutions for the Fairfax County committee including a call to end the Atlantic slave trade which were adopted. 77 On August 1 Washington attended the First Virginia Convention . There he was selected as a delegate to the First Continental Congress . 78 As tensions rose in 1774 he helped train militias in Virginia and organized enforcement of the Continental Association boycott of British goods instituted by the Congress. 79 The American Revolutionary War broke out on April 19 1775 with the Battles of Lexington and Concord and the Siege of Boston . 80 Upon hearing the news Washington was sobered and dismayed 81 and he hastily departed Mount Vernon on May 4 1775 to join the Second Continental Congress in Philadelphia . 82 Commander in chief 17751783 Further information: Military career of George Washington and Washingtons aides-de-camp General Washington Commander of the Continental Army a 1776 portrait by Charles Willson Peale On June 14 1775 Congress created the Continental Army and John Adams nominated Washington as its commander-in-chief mainly because of his military experience and the belief that a Virginian would better unite the colonies. He was unanimously elected by Congress the next day. 83 Washington appeared before Congress in uniform and gave an acceptance speech on June 16 declining a salary though he was later reimbursed expenses. 84 Washington was commissioned on June 19 and officially appointed by Congress as General Commander in chief of the army of the United Colonies and of all the forces raised or to be raised by them . 85 He was instructed to take charge of the Siege of Boston on June 22 1775. 86 Congress chose his primary staff officers including Major General Artemas Ward Adjutant General Horatio Gates Major General Charles Lee Major General Philip Schuyler and Major General Nathanael Greene . 87 Henry Knox a young bookkeeper impressed Adams and Washington with ordnance knowledge and was subsequently promoted to colonel and chief of artillery. Similarly Washington was impressed by Alexander Hamilton s intelligence and bravery. He would later promote him to colonel and appoint him his aide-de-camp . 88 Washington initially banned the enlistment of blacks both free and enslaved into the Continental Army. The British saw an opportunity to divide the colonies and the colonial governor of Virginia issued a proclamation which promised freedom to slaves if they joined the British. 89 Desperate for manpower by late 1777 Washington relented and overturned his ban. 90 By the end of the war around one-tenth of Washingtons army were blacks. 91 Following the British surrender Washington sought to enforce terms of the preliminary Treaty of Paris 1783 by reclaiming slaves freed by the British and returning them to servitude. He arranged to make this request to Sir Guy Carleton on May 6 1783. Instead Carleton issued 3 000 freedom certificates and all former slaves in New York City were able to leave before the city was evacuated by the British in late November 1783. 92 Siege of Boston Main article: Siege of Boston Washington arriving in Boston on July 2 1775 to take command of the Continental Army Early in 1775 in response to the growing rebellious movement London sent British troops to occupy Boston led by General Thomas Gage commander of British forces in America. 93 They set up fortifications making the city impervious to attack. Local militias surrounded the city and effectively trapped the British troops resulting in a standoff. 94 As Washington headed for Boston word of his march preceded him and he was greeted everywhere; gradually he became a symbol of the Patriot cause. 95 Upon Washingtons arrival on July 2 1775 two weeks after the Battle of Bunker Hill he set up headquarters in Cambridge . When he went to inspect the army he found undisciplined militia. 96 After consultation he initiated Benjamin Franklin s suggested reforms: drilling the soldiers and imposing strict discipline. 97 Washington ordered his officers to identify the skills of recruits to ensure military effectiveness while removing incompetent officers. 98 He petitioned Gage his former superior to release captured Patriot officers from prison and treat them humanely. 99 In October 1775 King George III declared that the colonies were in open rebellion and relieved Gage of command for incompetence replacing him with General William Howe . 100 The Continental Army reduced to only 9 600 men by January 1776 due to expiring short-term enlistments had to be supplemented with militia. Soon they were joined by Knox with heavy artillery captured from Fort Ticonderoga . 101 When the Charles River froze over Washington was eager to cross and storm Boston but General Gates and others were opposed to untrained militia striking well-garrisoned fortifications. Instead he agreed to secure the Dorchester Heights 100 feet 30 m above Boston with Knoxs artillery to try to force the British out. 102 On March 9 under cover of darkness Washingtons troops bombarded British ships in Boston harbor. On March 17 9 000 British troops and Loyalists began a chaotic ten-day evacuation aboard 120 ships. Soon after Washington entered the city with 500 men with explicit orders not to plunder the city. 103 He refrained from exerting military authority in Boston leaving civilian matters in the hands of local authorities. g 105 New York and New Jersey Main article: New York and New Jersey Campaign Battle of Long Island Main article: Battle of Long Island Battle of Long Island an 1858 painting by Alonzo Chappel After the victory at Boston Washington correctly guessed that the British would return to New York City a Loyalist stronghold and retaliate. He arrived there on April 13 1776 and ordered the construction of fortifications to thwart the expected British attack. He also ordered his occupying forces to treat civilians and their property with respect to avoid the abuses Bostonians suffered at the hands of British troops. 106 Howe transported his resupplied army with the British fleet from Halifax to New York City . George Germain who ran the British war effort in England believed it could be won with one decisive blow . 107 The British forces including more than a hundred ships and thousands of troops began arriving on Staten Island on July 2 to lay siege to the city. 108 After the Declaration of Independence was unanimously adopted on July 4 Washington informed his troops on July 9 that Congress had declared the united colonies to be free and independent states . 109 Howes troop strength totaled 32 000 regulars and Hessian auxiliaries and Washingtons consisted of 23 000 mostly raw recruits and militia. 110 In August Howe landed 20 000 troops at Gravesend Brooklyn and approached Washingtons fortifications Opposing his generals Washington chose to fight based on inaccurate information that Howes army had only 8 000-plus troops. 111 In the Battle of Long Island Howe assaulted Washingtons flank and inflicted 1 500 Patriot casualties the British suffering 400. 112 Washington retreated instructing General William Heath to acquire river craft. On August 30 General William Alexander held off the British and gave cover while the army crossed the East River under darkness to Manhattan without loss of life or materiel although Alexander was captured. 113 Howe was emboldened by his Long Island victory and dispatched Washington as George Washington Esq. in futility to negotiate peace. Washington declined demanding to be addressed with diplomatic protocol as general and fellow belligerent not as a rebel lest his men be hanged as such if captured. 114 The Royal Navy bombarded the unstable earthworks on lower Manhattan Island. 115 Despite misgivings Washington heeded the advice of Generals Greene and Putnam to defend Fort Washington . They were unable to hold it; Washington abandoned the fort and ordered his army north to the White Plains . 116 Howes pursuit forced Washington to retreat across the Hudson River to Fort Lee to avoid encirclement. Howe landed his troops on Manhattan in November and captured Fort Washington inflicting high casualties on the Americans. Washington was responsible for delaying the retreat though he blamed Congress and General Greene. Loyalists in New York City considered Howe a liberator and spread a rumor that Washington had set fire to the city. 117 Patriot morale reached its lowest when Lee was captured. 118 Now reduced to 5 400 troops Washingtons army retreated through New Jersey and Howe broke off pursuit to set up winter quarters in New York. 119 Crossing the Delaware Trenton and Princeton Main articles: George Washingtons crossing of the Delaware River Battle of Trenton Battle of the Assunpink Creek and Battle of Princeton Washington Crossing the Delaware an 1851 portrait by Emanuel Leutze The Passage of the Delaware an 1819 portrait by Thomas Sully The Capture of the Hessians at Trenton December 26 1776 a John Trumbull portrait depicting the Battle of Trenton Washington crossed the Delaware River into Pennsylvania where Lees replacement General John Sullivan joined him with 2 000 more troops. 120 The future of the Continental Army was in doubt due to lack of supplies a harsh winter expiring enlistments and desertions. Washington was disappointed that many New Jersey residents were Loyalists or skeptical about independence. 121 Howe split up his army and posted a Hessian garrison at Trenton to hold western New Jersey and the east shore of the Delaware. 122 Desperate for a victory Washington and his generals devised a surprise attack on Trenton. The army was to cross the Delaware in three divisions: one led by Washington 2 400 troops another by General James Ewing 700 and the third by Colonel John Cadwalader 1 500. The force was to then split with Washington taking the Pennington Road and General Sullivan traveling south on the rivers edge. 123 Washington ordered a 60-mile search for Durham boats to transport his army and the destruction of vessels that could be used by the British. 124 He personally risked capture while staking out the Jersey shoreline alone leading up to the crossing. Washington crossed the Delaware on Christmas night 1776. 125 His men followed across the ice-obstructed river from McConkeys Ferry with 40 men per vessel. The wind churned up the waters and they were pelted with hail but by 3:00 a.m. on December 26 they made it across with no losses. 126 Knox was delayed managing frightened horses and about 18 field guns on flat-bottomed ferries. Cadwalader and Ewing failed to cross due to the ice and heavy currents. Once Knox arrived Washington proceeded to Trenton rather than risk being spotted returning his army to Pennsylvania. 127 The troops spotted Hessian positions a mile from Trenton so Washington split his force into two columns rallying his men: Soldiers keep by your officers. For Gods sake keep by your officers. The two columns were separated at the Birmingham crossroads. General Greenes column took the upper Ferry Road led by Washington and General Sullivans column advanced on River Road. 128 The Americans marched in sleet and snowfall. Many were shoeless with bloodied feet and two died of exposure. At sunrise Washington aided by Colonel Knox and artillery led his men in a surprise attack on the unsuspecting Hessians and their commander Colonel Johann Rall . The Hessians had 22 killed including Colonel Rall 83 wounded and 850 captured with supplies. 129 Washington retreated across the Delaware to Pennsylvania and returned to New Jersey on January 3 1777 launching an attack on British regulars at Princeton with 40 Americans killed or wounded and 273 British killed or captured. 130 American Generals Hugh Mercer and John Cadwalader were being driven back by the British when Mercer was mortally wounded. Washington arrived and led the men in a counterattack which advanced to within 30 yards 27 m of the British line. 131 Some British troops retreated after a brief stand while others took refuge in Nassau Hall which became the target of Colonel Alexander Hamilton s cannons. Washingtons troops charged the British surrendered in less than an hour and 194 soldiers laid down their arms. 132 Howe retreated to New York City where his army remained inactive until early the next year. 133 Washington took up winter headquarters in Jacob Arnolds Tavern in Morristown New Jersey 134 while he received munition from the Hibernia mines . 135 While in Morristown Washingtons troops disrupted British supply lines and expelled them from parts of New Jersey. 136 During his stay in Morristown Washington ordered the inoculation of Continental troops against smallpox. This went against the wishes of the Continental Congress who had issued a proclamation prohibiting it but Washington feared the spread of smallpox in the army. The mass inoculation proved successful with only isolated infections occurring and no regiments incapacitated by the disease. 137 The British still controlled New York and many Patriot soldiers did not re-enlist or deserted after the harsh winter campaign. Congress instituted greater rewards for re-enlisting and punishments for desertion to effect greater troop numbers. 138 Strategically Washingtons victories at Trenton and Princeton were pivotal; they revived Patriot morale and quashed the British strategy of showing overwhelming force followed by offering generous terms changing the course of the war. 139 125 In February 1777 word of the American victories reached London and the British realized the Patriots were in a position to demand unconditional independence. 140 Philadelphia Main article: Philadelphia campaign Brandywine Germantown and Saratoga Main articles: Battle of Brandywine Battle of Germantown and Battles of Saratoga In July 1777 British General John Burgoyne led the Saratoga campaign south from Quebec through Lake Champlain and recaptured Fort Ticonderoga intending to divide New England including control of the Hudson River . However General Howe in British-occupied New York City blundered taking his army south to Philadelphia rather than up the Hudson River to join Burgoyne near Albany . 141 Washington and Gilbert du Motier Marquis de Lafayette rushed to Philadelphia to engage Howe. In the Battle of Brandywine on September 11 1777 Howe outmaneuvered Washington and marched unopposed into the nations capital at Philadelphia. A Patriot attack failed against the British at Germantown in October. 142 In Upstate New York the Patriots were led by General Horatio Gates . Concerned about Burgoynes movements southward Washington sent reinforcements north with Generals Benedict Arnold his most aggressive field commander and Benjamin Lincoln . On October 7 1777 Burgoyne tried to take Bemis Heights but was isolated from support by Howe. He was forced to retreat to Saratoga and ultimately surrendered after the Battles of Saratoga . As Washington suspected Gates victory emboldened his critics. 143 Biographer John Alden maintains It was inevitable that the defeats of Washingtons forces and the concurrent victory of the forces in upper New York should be compared. Admiration for Washington was waning including little credit from John Adams. 144 145 Valley Forge and Monmouth Main articles: Valley Forge and Battle of Monmouth Washington and Lafayette at Valley Forge a 1907 portrait by John Ward Dunsmore Washington Rallying the Troops at Monmouth an 1854 portrait by Emanuel Leutze depicting Washington at the Battle of Monmouth Washington and his Continental Army of 11 000 men went into winter quarters at Valley Forge north of Philadelphia in December 1777. There they lost between 2 000 and 3 000 men as a result of disease and lack of food clothing and shelter. 146 The British were comfortably quartered in Philadelphia paying for supplies in pounds sterling while Washington struggled with a devalued American paper currency . The woodlands were soon exhausted of game. By February Washington was facing lowered morale and increased desertions among his troops. 147 An internal revolt by his officers led by Major General Thomas Conway prompted some members of Congress to consider removing Washington from command. Washingtons supporters resisted and the matter was dropped after much deliberation. 148 Once the plot was exposed Conway wrote an apology to Washington resigned and returned to France. 149 Washington made repeated petitions to Congress for provisions. He received a congressional delegation to check the Armys conditions and expressed the urgency of the situation proclaiming: Something must be done. Important alterations must be made. He recommended that Congress expedite supplies and Congress agreed to strengthen and fund the armys supply lines by reorganizing the commissary department. By late February supplies began arriving. 104 Meanwhile Baron Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben s incessant drilling transformed Washingtons recruits into a disciplined fighting force by the end of winter camp. 150 For his services Washington promoted Von Steuben to Major General and made him chief of staff. 151 152 In early 1778 the French responded to Burgoynes defeat and entered into a Treaty of Alliance with the Americans. Congress ratified the treaty in May which amounted to a French declaration of war against Britain. 153 In May 1778 Howe resigned and was replaced by Sir Henry Clinton . 154 The British evacuated Philadelphia for New York that June and Washington summoned a war council of American and French generals. He chose a partial attack on the retreating British at the Battle of Monmouth . Generals Charles Lee and Lafayette moved with 4 000 men without Washingtons knowledge and bungled their first attack on June 28. Washington relieved Lee and achieved a draw after an expansive battle. At nightfall the British continued their retreat to New York and Washington moved his army outside the city. 155 Monmouth was Washingtons last battle in the North. 156 West Point espionage Main articles: Culper Ring and Military career of Benedict Arnold 17771779 Washington became Americas first spymaster by designing an espionage system against the British. 157 In 1778 Major Benjamin Tallmadge formed the Culper Ring at Washingtons direction to covertly collect information about the British in New York. 158 Washington had disregarded incidents of disloyalty by Benedict Arnold who had distinguished himself in many campaigns including his invasion of Quebec and the Battle of Saratoga . 159 In 1780 Arnold began supplying British spymaster John Andre with sensitive information intended to compromise Washington and capture West Point a key American defensive position on the Hudson River . 160 Historians Nathaniel Philbrick and Ron Chernow noted possible reasons for Arnolds defection to be his anger at losing promotions to junior officers or repeated slights from Congress. He was also deeply in debt profiteering from the war and disappointed by Washingtons lack of support during his eventual court-martial . 161 After repeated requests Washington agreed to give Arnold command of West Point in August. 162 On September 21 Arnold met Andre and gave him plans to take over the garrison. 163 While returning to British lines Andre was captured by militia who discovered the plans; upon hearing the news of Andres capture on September 24 while waiting to greet and have breakfast with Washington Arnold immediately fled to HMS Vulture the ship that had brought Andre to West Point and escaped to New York. 164 Upon being told about Arnolds treason Washington recalled the commanders positioned under Arnold at key points around the fort to prevent any complicity. He assumed personal command at West Point and reorganized its defenses. 165 Andres trial for espionage ended in a death sentence and Washington offered to return him to the British in exchange for Arnold but Clinton refused. Andre was hanged on October 2 1780 despite his request for a firing squad to deter other spies. 166 Southern theater and Yorktown Main article: Southern theater of the American Revolutionary War Generals Washington and Rochambeau give final orders before launching the Siege of Yorktown in Yorktown Virginia in September 1781. In late 1778 General Clinton shipped 3 000 troops from New York to Georgia and launched a Southern invasion against Savannah reinforced by 2 000 British and Loyalist troops. They repelled an attack by American patriots and French naval forces which bolstered the British war effort. 167 In June 1778 Iroquois warriors joined with Loyalist rangers led by Walter Butler and killed more than 200 frontiersmen laying waste to the Wyoming Valley in Northeastern Pennsylvania . 168 In mid-1779 in response to this and other attacks on New England towns Washington ordered General John Sullivan to lead an expedition to force the Iroquois out of New York by effecting the total destruction and devastation of their villages and taking their women and children hostage. 169 170 The expedition systematically destroyed Iroquois villages and food stocks and forced at least 5 036 Iroquois to flee to British Canada. The campaign directly killed a few hundred Iroquois but according to historian Rhiannon Koehler the net effect was to reduce the Iroquois by half. They became unable to survive the harsh winter of 17791780; some historians now describe the campaign as a genocide. 171 Washingtons troops went into quarters at Morristown New Jersey for their worst winter of the war with temperatures well below freezing. New York Harbor was frozen snow covered the ground for weeks and the troops again lacked provisions. 172 In January 1780 Clinton assembled 12 500 troops and attacked Charles Town South Carolina defeating General Benjamin Lincoln . By June they occupied the South Carolina Piedmont . 173 Clinton returned to New York and left 8 000 troops under the command of General Charles Cornwallis . 174 Congress replaced Lincoln with Horatio Gates; after his defeat in the Battle of Camden Gates was replaced by Nathanael Greene Washingtons initial choice but the British had firm control of the South. Washington was reinvigorated however when Lafayette returned from France with more ships men and supplies 175 and 5 000 veteran French troops led by Marshal Rochambeau arrived at Newport Rhode Island in July 1780. 176 French naval forces then landed led by Admiral de Grasse . 177 Washingtons army went into winter quarters at New Windsor New York in December 1780; he urged Congress and state officials to expedite provisions so the army would not continue to struggle under the same difficulties they have hitherto endured . 178 On March 1 1781 Congress ratified the Articles of Confederation but the government that took effect on March 2 did not have the power to levy taxes and it loosely held the states together. 179 General Clinton sent Benedict Arnold now a British Brigadier General with 1 700 troops to Virginia to capture Portsmouth and conduct raids on Patriot forces; Washington responded by sending Lafayette south to counter Arnolds efforts. 180 Washington initially hoped to bring the fight to New York drawing off British forces from Virginia and ending the war there but Rochambeau advised him that Cornwallis in Virginia was the better target. De Grasses fleet arrived off the Virginia coast cutting off British retreat. Seeing the advantage Washington made a feint towards Clinton in New York then headed south to Virginia. 181 Yorktown Main article: Siege of Yorktown The siege of Yorktown was a decisive victory by the combined forces of the Continental Army commanded by Washington the French Army commanded by General Comte de Rochambeau and the French Navy commanded by Admiral de Grasse. On August 19 the march to Yorktown led by Washington and Rochambeau began which is known now as the celebrated march . 182 Washington was in command of an army of 7 800 Frenchmen 3 100 militia and 8 000 Continentals. Inexperienced in siege warfare he often deferred to the judgment of General Rochambeau and relied on his advice. Despite this Rochambeau never challenged Washingtons authority as the battles commanding officer. 183 By late September Patriot-French forces surrounded Yorktown trapped the British Army and prevented British reinforcements from Clinton in the North while the French navy emerged victorious at the Battle of the Chesapeake . The final American offensive began with a shot fired by Washington. 184 The siege ended with a British surrender on October 19 1781; over 7 000 British soldiers became prisoners of war . 185 Washington negotiated the terms of surrender for two days and the official signing ceremony took place on October 19; Cornwallis claimed illness and was absent sending General Charles OHara as his proxy. 186 As a gesture of goodwill Washington held a dinner for the American French and British generals all of whom fraternized on friendly terms and identified with one another as members of the same professional military caste . 187 Afterwards Washington moved the army to New Windsor New York where they remained stationed until the Treaty of Paris was signed on September 3 1783 formally ending the war. Although the peace treaty did not happen for two years following the end of the battle Yorktown proved to be the last significant battle or campaign of the Revolutionary War with the British Parliament agreeing to cease hostilities in March 1782. 188 Demobilization and resignation Main article: George Washingtons resignation as commander-in-chief General George Washington Resigning His Commission an 1824 portrait by John Trumbull When peace negotiations began in April 1782 both the British and French began gradually evacuating their forces. 189 With the American treasury empty unpaid and mutinous soldiers forced the adjournment of Congress. In March 1783 Washington successfully calmed the Newburgh Conspiracy a planned munity by American officers; Congress promised each a five-year bonus. 190 Washington submitted an account of 450 000 in expenses which he had advanced to the army equivalent to 9.53 million in 2023. The account was settled though it was allegedly vague about large sums and included expenses his wife had incurred through visits to his headquarters. 191 The following month a Congressional committee led by Alexander Hamilton began adapting the army for peacetime. In August 1783 Washington gave the Armys perspective to the committee in his Sentiments on a Peace Establishment which advised Congress to keep a standing army create a national militia of separate state units and establish a navy and a national military academy. 192 The Treaty of Paris was signed on September 3 1783 and Britain officially recognized American independence. Washington disbanded his army giving a farewell address to his soldiers on November 2. 193 During this time Washington oversaw the evacuation of British forces in New York and was greeted by parades and celebrations. 194 Along with Governor George Clinton he took formal possession of the city on November 25. 195 In early December 1783 Washington bade farewell to his officers at Fraunces Tavern and resigned as commander-in-chief soon thereafter. 196 In a final appearance in uniform he gave a statement to the Congress: I consider it an indispensable duty to close this last solemn act of my official life by commending the interests of our dearest country to the protection of Almighty God and those who have the superintendence of them to his holy keeping. 197 Washingtons resignation was acclaimed at home and abroad and showed a skeptical world that the new republic would not degenerate into chaos. h 199 The same month Washington was appointed president-general of the Society of the Cincinnati a newly established hereditary fraternity of Revolutionary War officers. He served in this capacity for the remainder of his life. i 201 Early republic 17831789 Further information: Confederation Period and Articles of Confederation Return to Mount Vernon I am not only retired from all public employments but I am retiring within myself and shall be able to view the solitary walk and tread the paths of private life with heartfelt satisfaction ... I will move gently down the stream of life until I sleep with my fathers. George Washington in a letter to Lafayette. February 1 1784. 202 Washington was longing to return home after spending just ten days at Mount Vernon out of 8 1 2 years of war. He arrived on Christmas Eve delighted to be free of the bustle of a camp and the busy scenes of public life . 203 He was a celebrity and was feted during a visit to his mother at Fredericksburg in February 1784 and he received a constant stream of visitors wishing to pay their respects at Mount Vernon. 204 Washington reactivated his interests in the Great Dismal Swamp and Potomac canal projects begun before the war though neither paid him any dividends and he undertook a 34-day 680-mile 1 090 km trip to check on his land holdings in the Ohio Country. 205 He oversaw the completion of the remodeling work at Mount Vernon which transformed his residence into the mansion that survives to this dayalthough his financial situation was not strong. Creditors paid him in depreciated wartime currency and he owed significant amounts in taxes and wages. Mount Vernon had made no profit during his absence and he saw persistently poor crop yields due to pestilence and poor weather. His estate recorded its eleventh year running at a deficit in 1787 and there was little prospect of improvement. 206 To make his estate profitable again Washington undertook a new landscaping plan and succeeded in cultivating a range of fast-growing trees and native shrubs. 207 He also began breeding mules after being gifted a Spanish jack by King Charles III of Spain in 1784. There were few mules in the United States at that time and he believed that they would revolutionize agriculture and transportation . 208 Constitutional Convention of 1787 Main article: Constitutional Convention United States Scene at the Signing of the Constitution of the United States a 1940 portrait by Howard Chandler Christy depicting Washington as the presiding officer at the Constitutional Convention in 1787 Before returning to private life in June 1783 Washington called for a strong union. Though he was concerned that he might be criticized for meddling in civil matters he sent a circular letter to the states maintaining that the Articles of Confederation was no more than a rope of sand . He believed the nation was on the verge of anarchy and confusion was vulnerable to foreign intervention and that a national constitution would unify the states under a strong central government. 209 When Shays Rebellion erupted in Massachusetts over taxation Washington was further convinced that a national constitution was needed. 210 Some nationalists feared that the new republic had descended into lawlessness and they met on September 11 1786 at Annapolis to ask Congress to revise the Articles of Confederation. One of their biggest efforts was getting Washington to attend. 211 Congress agreed to a Constitutional Convention to be held in Philadelphia in Spring 1787 with each state to send delegates. 212 On December 4 1786 Washington was chosen to lead the Virginia delegation but he declined on December 21. He had concerns about the legality of the convention and consulted James Madison Henry Knox and others. They persuaded him to attend as his presence might induce reluctant states to send delegates and smooth the way for the ratification process while also giving legitimacy to the convention. 213 On March 28 Washington told Governor Edmund Randolph that he would attend the convention but made it clear that he was urged to attend. 214 Washington arrived in Philadelphia on May 9 1787 though a quorum was not attained until May 25. Benjamin Franklin nominated Washington to preside over the convention and he was unanimously elected to serve as president general. 215 The conventions state-mandated purpose was to revise the Articles of Confederation and the new government would be established when the resulting document was duly confirmed by the several states . 216 Randolph introduced Madisons Virginia Plan on May 27 the third day of the convention. It called for an entirely new constitution and a sovereign national government which Washington highly recommended. 217 On July 10 Washington wrote to Alexander Hamilton : I almost despair of seeing a favorable issue to the proceedings of our convention and do therefore repent having had any agency in the business. 218 Nevertheless he lent his prestige to the work of the other delegates unsuccessfully lobbying many to support ratification of the Constitution such as anti-federalists Edmund Randolph and George Mason . 219 The final version was voted on and signed by 39 of 55 delegates on September 17 1787. Chancellor of William Mary In 1788 the Board of Visitors of the College of William Mary decided to re-establish the position of Chancellor and elected Washington to the office on January 18. 220 The College Rector Samuel Griffin wrote to Washington inviting him to the post and in a letter dated April 30 1788 Washington accepted the position of the 14th Chancellor of the College of William Mary . 221 He continued to serve through his presidency until his death on December 14 1799. 220 First presidential election Main article: 17881789 United States presidential election The delegates to the Convention anticipated a Washington presidency and left it to him to define the office once elected. j 218 The state electors under the Constitution voted for the president on February 4 1789 and Washington suspected that most Republicans had not voted for him. 223 The mandated March 4 date passed without a Congressional quorum to count the votes but a quorum was reached on April 5. The votes were tallied the next day and Washington won the majority of every states electoral votes. He was informed of his election as president by Congressional Secretary Charles Thomson . 224 John Adams received the next highest number of votes and was elected vice president. 225 Despite feeling anxious and painful sensations about leaving Mount Vernon he departed for New York City on April 16 to be inaugurated. 226 227 Presidency 17891797 Main article: Presidency of George Washington President George Washington a 1795 portrait by Gilbert Stuart Washington was inaugurated on April 30 1789 taking the oath of office at Federal Hall in New York City. k 229 His coach was led by militia and a marching band and followed by statesmen and foreign dignitaries in an inaugural parade with a crowd of 10 000. 230 Chancellor Robert R. Livingston administered the oath using a Bible provided by the Masons after which the militia fired a 13-gun salute. 231 Washington read a speech in the Senate Chamber asking that Almighty Being ... consecrate the liberties and happiness of the people of the United States . 232 Though he wished to serve without a salary Congress insisted that he accept it later providing Washington 25 000 per year to defray costs of the presidency equivalent to 6.39 million today. 233 Washington wrote to James Madison : As the first of everything in our situation will serve to establish a precedent it is devoutly wished on my part that these precedents be fixed on true principles. 234 To that end he preferred the title Mr. President over more majestic names proposed by the Senate including His Excellency and His Highness the President . 235 His executive precedents included the inaugural address messages to Congress and the cabinet form of the executive branch . 236 Washington planned to resign after his first term but political strife convinced him to remain in office. 237 He was an able administrator and a judge of talent and character and he regularly talked with department heads to get their advice. 238 He tolerated opposing views despite fears that a democratic system would lead to political violence and he conducted a smooth transition of power to his successor. 239 He remained non-partisan throughout his presidency the only United States president to do so and opposed the divisiveness of political parties but he favored a strong central government was sympathetic to a Federalist form of government and leery of the Republican opposition. 240 Washington dealt with major problems. The old Confederation lacked the powers to handle its workload and had weak leadership no executive a small bureaucracy of clerks large debt worthless paper money and no power to establish taxes. 241 He had the task of assembling an executive department and relied on Tobias Lear for advice selecting its officers. 242 Britain refused to relinquish its forts in the American West 241 and Barbary pirates preyed on American merchant ships in the Mediterranean before the United States even had a navy. 243 Cabinet and executive departments See also: Cabinet of the United States The Washington cabinet Office Name Term President George Washington 17891797 Vice President John Adams 17891797 Secretary of State John Jay acting 17891790 Thomas Jefferson 17901793 Edmund Randolph 17941795 Timothy Pickering 17951797 Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton 17891795 Oliver Wolcott Jr. 17951797 Secretary of War Henry Knox 17891794 Timothy Pickering 1795 James McHenry 17961797 Attorney General Edmund Randolph 17891794 William Bradford 17941795 Charles Lee 17951797 Congress created executive departments in 1789 including the State Department in July the War Department in August and the Treasury Department in September. Washington appointed Edmund Randolph as Attorney General Samuel Osgood as Postmaster General Thomas Jefferson as Secretary of State Henry Knox as Secretary of War and Alexander Hamilton as Secretary of the Treasury . Washingtons cabinet became a consulting and advisory body not mandated by the Constitution. 244 Washingtons cabinet members formed rival parties with sharply opposing views most fiercely illustrated between Hamilton and Jefferson. 245 Washington restricted cabinet discussions to topics of his choosing without participating in the debate. He occasionally requested cabinet opinions in writing and expected department heads to agreeably carry out his decisions. 241 Domestic issues Washington was apolitical and opposed the formation of parties suspecting that conflict would undermine republicanism. 246 He exercised great restraint in using his veto power writing that I give my Signature to many Bills with which my Judgment is at variance... 247 His closest advisors formed two factions portending the First Party System . Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton formed the Federalist Party to promote national credit and a financially powerful nation. Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson opposed Hamiltons agenda and founded the Jeffersonian Republicans . Washington favored Hamiltons agenda however and it ultimately went into effectresulting in bitter controversy. 248 Washington proclaimed November 26 1789 as a day of Thanksgiving to encourage national unity. It is the duty of all nations to acknowledge the providence of Almighty God to obey His will to be grateful for His benefits and humbly to implore His protection and favor. He spent that day fasting and visiting debtors in prison to provide them with food and beer. 249 African Americans In response to two antislavery petitions that were presented to Congress in 1790 slaveholders in Georgia and South Carolina threatened to blow the trumpet of civil war . Washington and Congress responded with a series of racist measures: naturalization was denied to black immigrants; blacks were barred from serving in state militias; the Southwest Territory later the state of Tennessee was permitted to maintain slavery; and two more slave states were admitted Kentucky in 1792 and Tennessee in 1796. On February 12 1793 Washington signed into law the Fugitive Slave Act which overrode state laws and courts allowing agents to cross state lines to return escaped slaves. 250 Many free blacks in the north decried the law believing it would allow bounty hunting and kidnapping. The Fugitive Slave Act gave effect to the Constitutions Fugitive Slave Clause and the Act was passed overwhelmingly in Congress. 251 At the same time Washington signed a reenactment of the Northwest Ordinance in 1789 which had freed all slaves brought after 1787 into a vast expanse of federal territory north of the Ohio River except for slaves escaping from slave states. 252 253 The 1787 law lapsed when the new U.S. Constitution was ratified in 1789. 254 He also signed the Slave Trade Act of 1794 which sharply limited American involvement in the Atlantic slave trade . 255 On February 18 1791 Congress admitted the free state of Vermont into the Union as the 14th state as of March 4 1791. 256 National Bank Presidents House in Philadelphia where both Washington and then John Adams worked and resided until completion of the White House in 1800 Washingtons first term was largely devoted to economic concerns. 257 Establishment of public credit became a primary challenge for the federal government. 258 Hamilton submitted a report to a deadlocked Congress and he Madison and Jefferson reached the Compromise of 1790 in which Jefferson agreed to Hamiltons debt proposals in exchange for moving the nations capital temporarily to Philadelphia and then south near Georgetown on the Potomac River . 248 The terms were legislated in the Funding Act of 1790 and the Residence Act both of which Washington signed into law. Congress authorized the assumption and payment of the nations debts with funding provided by customs duties and excise taxes. 259 Hamilton caused controversy in Cabinet by advocating for the establishment of the First Bank of the United States . Madison and Jefferson objected to the idea but legislation creating the bank easily passed Congress. Jefferson and Randolph insisted the federal government was going beyond its constitutional authority. Hamilton argued the government could charter the bank under the implied powers granted by the constitution. Washington sided with Hamilton and signed the bank legislation on February 25 1791. The rift between Hamilton and Jefferson meanwhile became openly hostile. 260 The nations first financial crisis occurred in March 1792. Hamiltons Federalists exploited large loans to gain control of U.S. debt securities causing a run on the national bank; 261 the markets returned to normal by mid-April. 262 Jefferson believed Hamilton was part of the scheme despite Hamiltons efforts to ameliorate. 263 JeffersonHamilton feud Thomas Jefferson left and Alexander Hamilton right held opposing political views and frequently clashed in cabinet meetings much to Washingtons dismay. Jefferson and Hamilton adopted diametrically opposed political principles. Hamilton believed in a strong national government requiring a national bank and foreign loans to function while Jefferson believed the states and the farm element should primarily direct the government; he also resented the idea of banks and foreign loans. To Washingtons dismay the two men persistently entered into disputes and infighting. 264 Hamilton demanded that Jefferson resign if he could not support Washington and Jefferson told Washington that Hamiltons fiscal system would lead to the overthrow of the republic. 265 Washington urged them to call a truce for the sake of the nation but they ignored him. 266 Jeffersons political actions his support of Freneaus National Gazette 267 and his attempts to undermine Hamilton nearly led Washington to dismiss him from the cabinet; he ultimately resigned his position in December 1793 and Washington forsook him. 268 The feud led to the well-defined Federalist and Republican parties and party affiliation became necessary for election to Congress by 1794. 269 Washington remained aloof from congressional attacks on Hamilton but did not publicly protect him. The HamiltonReynolds sex scandal opened Hamilton to disgrace but Washington continued to hold him in very high esteem . 270 Whiskey Rebellion Main article: Whiskey Rebellion Washington reviews the troops near Fort Cumberland Maryland before their march to suppress the Whiskey Rebellion in Western Pennsylvania In March 1791 at Hamiltons urging with support from Madison Congress imposed an excise tax on distilled spirits to help curtail the national debt which took effect in July. 271 Grain farmers strongly protested in Pennsylvanias frontier districts; they argued that they were unrepresented and were shouldering too much of the debt comparing their situation to British taxation pre-Revolution. On August 2 Washington assembled his cabinet to discuss the situation. Unlike Washington who had reservations about using force Hamilton was eager to suppress the rebellion with federal authority. 272 Wanting to avoid involving the federal government Washington first called on Pennsylvania state officials to take the initiative but they declined. On August 7 Washington issued his first proclamation for calling up state militias. After appealing for peace he reminded the protestors that unlike the rule of the British crown the Federal law was issued by state-elected representatives. 273 Threats and violence against tax collectors however escalated into defiance against federal authority in 1794 and gave rise to the Whiskey Rebellion . Washington issued a final proclamation on September 25 threatening the use of military force to no avail. 273 The federal army was not up to the task so Washington invoked the Militia Act of 1792 to summon state militias. 274 Governors sent troops initially commanded by Washington who handed over command to Henry Lee to lead them into the rebellious districts. They took 150 prisoners and the remaining rebels dispersed. Two of the prisoners were condemned to death but Washington exercised his Constitutional authority for the first time and pardoned them. 275 Washingtons forceful action demonstrated that the new government could protect itself and its tax collectors. This represented the first use of federal military force against the states and citizens. 276 Washington justified his action against certain self-created societies which he regarded as subversive organizations that threatened the national union. He did not dispute their right to protest but he insisted that their dissent must not violate federal law. Congress agreed and extended their congratulations to him; only Madison and Jefferson expressed indifference. 277 Foreign affairs In April 1792 the French Revolutionary Wars began between Britain and France and Washington declared Americas neutrality. The revolutionary government of France sent diplomat Edmond-Charles Genet to America and he was welcomed with great enthusiasm. He created a network of new Democratic-Republican Societies promoting Frances interests but Washington denounced them and demanded that the French recall Genet. 278 The National Assembly of France granted Washington honorary French citizenship on August 26 1792 during the early stages of the French Revolution . 279 Hamilton formulated the Jay Treaty to normalize trade relations with Britain while removing them from western forts and also to resolve financial debts remaining from the Revolution. 280 Chief Justice John Jay acted as Washingtons negotiator and signed the treaty on November 19 1794; critical Jeffersonians however supported France. Washington deliberated then supported the treaty because it avoided war with Britain 281 but was disappointed that its provisions favored Britain. 282 He mobilized public opinion and secured ratification in the Senate 283 but faced frequent public criticism. 284 The British agreed to abandon their forts around the Great Lakes and the United States modified the boundary with Canada. The government liquidated numerous pre-Revolution debts and the British opened the British West Indies to American trade. The treaty secured peace with Britain and a decade of prosperous trade. Jefferson claimed that it angered France and invited rather than avoided war. 285 Relations with France deteriorated afterward and two days before Washingtons term ended the French Directory declared the authority to seize American ships 286 leaving succeeding president John Adams with prospective war. 287 Native American affairs Main articles: Northwest Indian War Treaty of New York 1790 and Treaty of Greenville Further information: Northwest Territory and Ohio Country Battle of Fallen Timbers an 1896 portrait by Rufus Fairchild Zogbaum depicting the final battle of the Northwest Indian War During the fall of 1789 Washington had to contend with the British refusing to evacuate their forts in the Northwest frontier and their concerted efforts to incite Indian tribes to attack American settlers. 288 The Northwest tribes under Miami chief Little Turtle allied with the British to resist American expansion and killed 1 500 settlers between 1783 and 1790. 289 Seneca chief Red Jacket was Washingtons peace emissary with the Northwestern Confederacy Washington declared that the Government of the United States are determined that their Administration of Indian Affairs shall be directed entirely by the great principles of Justice and humanity and provided that treaties should negotiate their land interests. 290 The administration regarded powerful tribes as foreign nations and Washington even smoked a peace pipe and drank wine with them at the Presidents House in Philadelphia. 291 He made numerous attempts to conciliate them; 292 he equated killing indigenous peoples with killing whites and sought to integrate them into European American culture. 293 In the Southwest negotiations failed between federal commissioners and raiding Indian tribes seeking retribution. Washington invited Creek Chief Alexander McGillivray and 24 leading chiefs to New York to negotiate a treaty and treated them like foreign dignitaries. Knox and McGillivray concluded the Treaty of New York on August 7 1790 which provided the tribes with agricultural supplies and McGillivray with the rank of Brigadier General and an annual salary of 1 200 equivalent to 29 573 in 2023. 294 In 1790 Washington sent Brigadier General Josiah Harmar to pacify the Northwest tribes but Little Turtle routed him twice and forced him to withdraw. 295 The Northwestern Confederacy of tribes used guerrilla tactics and were an effective force against the sparsely manned American Army. Washington sent Major General Arthur St. Clair from Fort Washington on an expedition to restore peace in the territory in 1791. On November 4 St. Clairs forces were ambushed and soundly defeated by tribal forces with few survivors. 296 Washington replaced the disgraced St. Clair with the Revolutionary War hero Anthony Wayne . From 1792 to 1793 Wayne instructed his troops on Native American warfare tactics and instilled discipline which was lacking under St. Clair. 297 In August 1794 Washington sent Wayne into tribal territory with authority to drive them out by burning their villages and crops in the Maumee Valley . 298 On August 24 the American army defeated the Northwestern Confederacy at the Battle of Fallen Timbers and the Treaty of Greenville in August 1795 opened two-thirds of the Ohio Country for American settlement. 299 Second term Portrait of the USS Constitution commissioned and named by President Washington in 1794 Washington initially planned to retire after his first term weary of office and in poor health. After dealing with the infighting in his own cabinet and with partisan critics he showed little enthusiasm for a second term while Martha also wanted him not to run. 300 Washingtons nephew George Augustine Washington managing Mount Vernon in his absence was critically ill further increasing Washingtons desire to retire. 301 Many however urged him to run for a second term. Madison told him that his absence would only allow the dangerous political rift in his cabinet and the House to worsen. Jefferson also pleaded with him not to retire agreeing to drop his attacks on Hamilton and stating that he would also retire if Washington did. 302 Hamilton maintained that Washingtons absence would be deplored as the greatest evil to the country. 303 With the election of 1792 nearing Washington relented and agreed to run. 293 On February 13 1793 the Electoral College unanimously re-elected Washington president and John Adams as vice president by a vote of 77 to 50. 293 He was sworn into office by Associate Justice William Cushing on March 4 1793 in the Senate Chamber of Congress Hall in Philadelphia. Afterwards Washington gave a brief address before immediately retiring to the Presidents House . 304 On April 22 1793 when the French Revolutionary Wars broke out Washington issued a proclamation which declared American neutrality. He was resolved to pursue a conduct friendly and impartial toward the belligerent Powers while also warning Americans not to intervene in the conflict. 305 Although Washington recognized Frances revolutionary government he would eventually ask French minister to the United States Edmond-Charles Genet be recalled over the Citizen Genet affair. 306 Genet was a diplomatic troublemaker who was openly hostile toward Washingtons neutrality policy. He procured four American ships as privateers to strike at Spanish forces British allies in Florida while organizing militias to strike at other British possessions. However his efforts failed to draw the United States into the conflict. 307 On July 31 1793 Jefferson submitted his resignation from cabinet. 308 Hamilton desiring more income for his family resigned from office in January 1795 and was replaced by Oliver Wolcott Jr. . While his relationship with Washington would remain friendly Washingtons relationship with his Secretary of War Henry Knox deteriorated after rumors that Knox had profited from contracts for the construction of U.S. frigates which had been commissioned under the Naval Act of 1794 in order to combat Barbary pirates forcing Knox to resign. 309 310 In the final months of his presidency Washington was assailed by his political foes and a partisan press who accused him of being ambitious and greedy. He came to regard the press as a disuniting diabolical force of falsehoods. 311 At the end of his second term Washington retired for personal and political reasons dismayed with personal attacks and to ensure that a truly contested presidential election could be held. He did not feel bound to a two-term limit but his retirement set a significant precedent. 312 Farewell Address Main article: George Washingtons Farewell Address Washingtons Farewell Address published by the American Daily Advertiser on September 19 1796 In 1796 Washington declined to run for a third term of office. 313 In May 1792 in anticipation of his retirement Washington instructed James Madison to prepare a valedictory address an initial draft of which was entitled the Farewell Address . 314 In May 1796 Washington sent the manuscript to Alexander Hamilton who did an extensive rewrite while Washington provided final edits. 315 On September 19 1796 David Claypooles American Daily Advertiser published the final version. 316 Washington stressed that national identity was paramount as a united America would safeguard freedom and prosperity. He warned the nation of three eminent dangers: regionalism partisanship and foreign entanglements and said the name of AMERICAN which belongs to you in your national capacity must always exalt the just pride of patriotism . 317 Washington called for men to move beyond partisanship for the common good stressing that the United States must concentrate on its own interests. He warned against foreign alliances and their influence in domestic affairs and bitter partisanship and the dangers of political parties. 318 He counseled friendship and commerce with all nations but advised against involvement in European wars. 319 He stressed the importance of religion asserting that religion and morality are indispensable supports in a republic. 320 Washingtons address favored Hamiltons Federalist ideology and economic policies. 321 He closed the address by reflecting on his legacy: Though in reviewing the incidents of my Administration I am unconscious of intentional error I am nevertheless too sensible of my defects not to think it probable that I may have committed many errors. Whatever they may be I fervently beseech the Almighty to avert or mitigate the evils to which they may tend. I shall also carry with me the hope that my country will never cease to view them with indulgence and that after forty-five years of my life dedicated to its service with an upright zeal the faults of incompetent abilities will be consigned to oblivion as myself must soon be to the mansions of rest . 322 After initial publication many Republicans including Madison criticized the Address and described it as an anti-French campaign document with Madison believing that Washington was strongly pro-British. 323 In 1839 Washington biographer Jared Sparks maintained that Washingtons Farewell Address was printed and published with the laws by order of the legislatures as an evidence of the value they attached to its political precepts and of their affection for its author. 324 In 1972 Washington scholar James Flexner referred to the Farewell Address as receiving as much acclaim as Thomas Jeffersons Declaration of Independence and Abraham Lincoln s Gettysburg Address . 325 In 2010 historian Ron Chernow called the Farewell Address one of the most influential statements on republicanism. 326 Post-presidency 17971799 Further information: Post-presidency of George Washington Retirement Washington retired to Mount Vernon in March 1797 and devoted time to his plantations and other business interests. 327 His plantation operations were only minimally profitable 32 and his lands in the west Piedmont were under Indian attacks and yielded little income with squatters there refusing to pay rent. He attempted to sell these but without success. 328 He became an even more committed Federalist. He vocally supported the Alien and Sedition Acts and convinced Federalist John Marshall to run for Congress to weaken the Jeffersonian hold on Virginia . 329 Washington grew restless in retirement prompted by tensions with France; in a continuation of the French Revolutionary Wars French privateers began seizing American ships in 1798 and relations deteriorated with France and led to the Quasi-War . Washington wrote to Secretary of War James McHenry offering to organize President Adams army. 330 Adams nominated him for a lieutenant general commission on July 4 1798 and the position of commander-in-chief of the armies. 331 Washington served as the commanding general from July 13 1798 until his death 17 months later. 332 He participated in planning for a provisional army but avoided involvement in details. In advising McHenry of potential officers for the army he appeared to make a complete break with Jeffersons Democratic-Republicans: you could as soon scrub the blackamoor white as to change the principles of a profest Democrat; and that he will leave nothing unattempted to overturn the government of this country. 333 Washington delegated the active leadership of the army to Hamilton a major general. No army invaded the United States during this period and Washington did not assume a field command. 334 Washington was known to be rich because of the well-known glorified facade of wealth and grandeur at Mount Vernon 335 but nearly all his wealth was in the form of land and slaves rather than ready cash. To supplement his income he erected a distillery for substantial whiskey production. 336 He bought land parcels to spur development around the new Federal City named in his honor and he sold individual lots to middle-income investors rather than multiple lots to large investors believing they would more likely commit to making improvements. 337 Final days and death Washington on his Deathbed an 1851 portrait by Junius Brutus Stearns On December 12 1799 Washington inspected his farms on horseback. He returned home late and had guests for dinner sitting down for the meal without changing his damp clothes from the inclement weather of the day. He had a sore throat the next day but was well enough to mark trees for cutting. That evening Washington complained of chest congestion. 338 The next morning however he awoke to an inflamed throat and difficulty breathing. He ordered estate overseer George Rawlins to remove nearly a pint of his blood; bloodletting was a common practice of the time. His family summoned doctors James Craik Gustavus Richard Brown and Elisha C. Dick . 339 A fourth doctor William Thornton arrived some hours after Washington died. 340 Brown initially believed Washington had quinsy ; Dick thought the condition was a more serious violent inflammation of the throat . 341 They continued the process of bloodletting to approximately five pints but Washingtons condition deteriorated further. Dick proposed a tracheotomy but the other physicians were not familiar with that procedure and disapproved. 342 Washington instructed Brown and Dick to leave the room while he assured Craik Doctor I die hard but I am not afraid to go. 343 Washingtons death came more swiftly than expected. 344 On his deathbed out of fear of being entombed alive he instructed his private secretary Tobias Lear to wait three days before his burial. 345 According to Lear Washington died between 10 p.m. and 11 p.m. on December 14 1799 with Martha seated at the foot of his bed. His last words were Tis well from his conversation with Lear about his burial. He was 67. 346 Congress immediately adjourned for the day upon news of Washingtons death and the Speakers chair was shrouded in black the next morning. 347 The funeral was held four days after his death on December 18 1799 at Mount Vernon where his body was interred. Cavalry and foot soldiers led the procession and six colonels served as the pallbearers. The Mount Vernon funeral service was restricted mostly to family and friends. 348 Reverend Thomas Davis read the funeral service by the vault with a brief address followed by a ceremony performed by members of Washingtons Masonic lodge in Alexandria Virginia . 349 Word of his death traveled slowly but as it reached other regions of the nation church bells rang in the cities and many businesses closed. 350 Memorial processions were held in major cities of the United States. Martha wore a black mourning cape for one year and she burned her correspondence with Washington to protect its privacy though five letters between the couple are known to have survived: two from Martha to George and three from him to her. 351 The diagnosis of Washingtons illness and the immediate cause of his death have been subjects of debate since his death. The published account of doctors Craik and Brown stated that his symptoms were consistent with cynanche trachealis a term then used to describe severe inflammation of the upper windpipe including quinsy. l Accusations have persisted since Washingtons death concerning medical malpractice. 342 Modern medical authors however largely have concluded that he likely died from severe epiglottitis complicated by the treatments including multiple doses of calomel a purgative and extensive bloodletting which likely caused hypovolemic shock . m Burial net worth and aftermath See also: Finances of George Washington The sarcophagi of George right and Martha Washington at the entrance to their tomb in Mount Vernon Washington was buried in the Washington family vault at Mount Vernon. At the time of his death his estate was worth an estimated 780 000 in 1799 equivalent to 14.29 million in 2023. 357 Washingtons peak net worth was 587 million including 300 slaves. 358 Washington held title to more than 65 000 acres of land in 37 different locations. 73 In 1830 a disgruntled ex-employee of the estate attempted to steal what he thought was Washingtons skull prompting the construction of a more secure vault. 359 In his will Washington had left instructions for the construction of a new vault as the old family vault was crumbling and needed repair even before his death. 350 A new vault was constructed at Mount Vernon the following year to receive the remains of George and Martha and other relatives. 360 In 1832 a joint Congressional committee debated moving his body from Mount Vernon to a crypt in the United States Capitol . The crypt had been built by architect Charles Bulfinch in the 1820s during the reconstruction of the burned-out capital after the Burning of Washington by the British during the War of 1812 . Southern opposition was intense antagonized by an ever-growing rift between North and South; many were concerned that Washingtons remains could end up on a shore foreign to his native soil if the country became divided and Washingtons remains stayed in Mount Vernon. 361 On October 7 1837 Washingtons remains still in the original lead coffin were placed within a marble sarcophagus designed by William Strickland and constructed by John Struthers. 362 The sarcophagus was sealed and encased with planks and an outer vault was constructed around it. 363 The outer vault has the sarcophagi of both George and Martha Washington; the inner vault has the remains of other Washington family members and relatives. 360 Personal life The Washington Family a late 18th century portrait by Edward Savage depicting George and Martha Washington with her grandchildren and an unnamed enslaved man Washington was somewhat reserved in personality but was known for having a strong presence. He made speeches and announcements when required but he was not a noted orator nor debater. 364 He was taller than most of his contemporaries; 365 accounts of his height vary from 6 ft 1.83 m to 6 ft 3.5 in 1.92 m tall 65 366 he weighed between 210220 pounds 95100 kg as an adult 367 and was known for his great strength. 368 He had grey-blue eyes and long reddish-brown hair. He did not wear a powdered wig ; instead he wore his hair curled powdered and tied in a queue in the fashion of the day . 369 370 Washington frequently suffered from severe tooth decay and ultimately lost all his teeth but one. He had several sets of false teeth during his presidency. Contrary to common lore these were not made of wood but of metal ivory bone animal teeth and human teeth possibly obtained from slaves. 371 372 373 These dental problems left him in constant pain which he treated with laudanum . 374 Washington was a talented equestrian with Thomas Jefferson describing him as the best horseman of his age . 375 He collected thoroughbreds at Mount Vernon his two favorite horses being Blueskin and Nelson . 376 He enjoyed hunting foxes deer ducks and other game. 377 He was an excellent dancer and frequently attended the theater. He drank alcohol in moderation but was morally opposed to excessive drinking smoking tobacco gambling and profanity. 378 Religious and spiritual views Main article: Religious views of George Washington Washington as Master Mason an 1870 print depicting Washington presiding over a Masonic lodge meeting just prior to the United States Capitol cornerstone laying on September 18 1793 Washington was descended from Anglican minister Lawrence Washington whose troubles with the Church of England may have prompted his heirs to emigrate to America. 379 He was baptized as an infant in April 1732 and became a devoted member of the Anglican Church. 380 He served more than 20 years as a vestryman and churchwarden at Fairfax Parish and Truro Parish in Virginia. 381 He privately prayed and read the Bible daily and publicly encouraged people and the nation to pray. 382 He may have taken communion on a regular basis prior to the Revolution but he did not do so following the war. 383 Washington believed in a wise inscrutable and irresistible Creator God who was active in the Universe contrary to deistic thought . 379 He referred to God in American Enlightenment terms including Providence the Creator or the Almighty and the Divine Author or Supreme Being . 384 He believed in a divine power who watched over battlefields was involved in the outcome of war protected his life and was involved in American politics and specifically the creation of the United States. n 386 Historian Ron Chernow has argued that Washington avoided evangelistic Christianity or hellfire-and-brimstone speech along with communion or anything inclined to flaunt his religiosity saying that he never used his religion as a device for partisan purposes or in official undertakings . 387 No mention of Jesus Christ appears in his private correspondence and such references are rare in his public writings. 388 At the same time Washington frequently quoted from the Bible or paraphrased it and often referred to the Anglican Book of Common Prayer . 389 Washington emphasized religious toleration in a nation with numerous denominations and religions. He publicly attended services of different Christian denominations and prohibited anti-Catholic celebrations in the Army. 390 He engaged workers at Mount Vernon without regard for religious belief or affiliation. While president he acknowledged major religious sects and gave speeches on religious toleration. 391 He was distinctly rooted in the ideas values and modes of thinking of the Enlightenment 392 but he harbored no contempt of organized Christianity and its clergy being no bigot myself to any mode of worship . 392 In 1793 speaking to members of the New Church in Baltimore Washington said We have abundant reason to rejoice that in this Land the light of truth and reason has triumphed over the power of bigotry and superstition. 393 Freemasonry was a widely accepted institution in the late 18th century known for advocating moral teachings. 394 Washington was attracted to the Masons dedication to the Enlightenment principles of rationality reason and brotherhood. American Masonic lodges did not share the anti-clerical views of the controversial European lodges . 395 A Masonic lodge was established in Fredericksburg Virginia in September 1752 and Washington was initiated two months later at the age of 20 as one of its first Entered Apprentices. Within a year he progressed through its ranks to become a Master Mason. 396 Washington had high regard for the Masonic Order but his lodge attendance was sporadic. In 1777 a convention of Virginia lodges asked him to be Grand Master of the newly established Grand Lodge of Virginia but he declined due to his commitments leading the Continental Army. After 1782 he frequently corresponded with Masonic lodges and members 397 and served as charter Master of Alexandria Masonic lodge No. 22 now Alexandria-Washington Lodge No. 22 in 178889. 398 Slavery Main article: George Washington and slavery Further information: Slavery in the colonial United States and Slavery in the United States In Washingtons lifetime slavery was deeply ingrained in the economic and social fabric of the Colony of Virginia which continued after the Revolution and the establishment of Virginia as a state. 399 400 Slavery was legal in all of the Thirteen Colonies prior to the American Revolution. 401 Washingtons slaves Washington the Farmer at Mount Vernon an 1851 portrait by Junius Brutus Stearns Washington owned and rented enslaved African Americans and during his lifetime over 577 slaves lived and worked at Mount Vernon. 402 403 He inherited some gained control of 84 dower slaves upon his marriage to Martha and purchased at least 71 slaves between 1752 and 1773. 404 From 1786 he rented slaves; at the time of his death he was renting 41. 405 402 Prior to the Revolutionary War Washingtons view on slavery was the same as most Virginia planters of the time. 406 Beginning in the 1760s however Washington gradually grew to oppose it. His first doubts were prompted by his transition from tobacco to grain crops which left him with a costly surplus of slaves causing him to question the systems economic efficiency. 407 His growing disillusionment with the institution was spurred by the principles of the Revolution and revolutionary friends such as Lafayette and Hamilton. 408 Most historians agree the Revolution was central to the evolution of Washingtons attitudes on slavery; 409 After 1783 Kenneth Morgan writes ... Washington began to express inner tensions about the problem of slavery more frequently though always in private . 410 Regardless Washington would remain dependent on slave labor to work his farms. 411 The many contemporary reports of slave treatment at Mount Vernon are varied and conflicting. 412 Historian Kenneth Morgan maintains that Washington was frugal on spending for clothes and bedding for his slaves and only provided them with just enough food and that he maintained strict control over his slaves instructing his overseers to keep them working hard from dawn to dusk year-round. 413 In contrast historian Dorothy Twohig said: Food clothing and housing seem to have been at least adequate . 414 Washington faced growing debts involved with the costs of supporting slaves. He held an engrained sense of racial superiority towards African Americans but harbored no ill feelings toward them. 415 Some enslaved families worked at different locations on the plantation but were allowed to visit one another on their days off. 416 Washingtons slaves received two hours off for meals during the workday and were given time off on Sundays and religious holidays. 417 418 Some accounts report that Washington opposed flogging but at times sanctioned its use generally as a last resort on both men and women slaves. 419 Washington used both reward and punishment to encourage discipline and productivity in his slaves. He tried appealing to an individuals sense of pride gave better blankets and clothing to the most deserving and motivated his slaves with cash rewards. He believed watchfulness and admonition were better deterrents against transgressions but would punish those who will not do their duty by fair means . Punishment ranged in severity from demotion back to fieldwork through whipping and beatings to permanent separation from friends and family by sale. Historian Ron Chernow maintains that overseers were required to warn slaves before resorting to the lash and required Washingtons written permission before whipping though his extended absences did not always permit this. 420 Runaway advertisement for Ona Judge enslaved servant in Washingtons presidential household During his presidency Washington brought several of his slaves to the federal capital. When the capital moved from New York City to Philadelphia in 1791 the president began rotating his slave household staff periodically between the capital and Mount Vernon. This was done deliberately to circumvent Pennsylvanias Slavery Abolition Act which stated that any slave who lived there for more than six months was automatically freed. 421 In May 1796 Marthas personal and favorite slave Ona Judge escaped to Portsmouth New Hampshire . At Marthas behest Washington attempted to capture Ona using a Treasury agent but failed. In February 1797 around the time of his 65th birthday Washingtons personal slave Hercules Posey escaped from Mount Vernon to the North and was never found. 422 In February 1786 Washington took a census of Mount Vernon and recorded 224 slaves. 423 By 1799 the slave population at Mount Vernon totaled 317 including 143 children. 424 Washington owned 124 slaves leased 40 and held 153 for his wifes dower interest. 425 6 Washington supported many slaves who were too young or too old to work greatly increasing Mount Vernons slave population and causing the plantation to operate at a loss. 426 Abolition and manumission Main article: Abolitionism in the United States Based on his private papers and on accounts from his contemporaries Washington slowly developed a cautious sympathy toward abolitionism that eventually ended with his will freeing his long-time valet Billy Lee and then subsequently freeing the rest of his personally owned slaves outright upon Marthas death. 427 428 As president he remained publicly silent on the topic of slavery believing it was a nationally divisive issue that could undermine the union. 429 In 1794 Washington privately told Tobias Lear his personal secretary that he found slavery repugnant During the Revolutionary War Washingtons views on slavery began to change. 401 In a 1778 letter to Lund Washington he made clear his desire to get quit of Negroes when discussing the exchange of slaves for the land he wanted to buy. 430 The next year Washington stated his intention not to separate enslaved families as a result of a change of masters . 431 During the 1780s Washington privately expressed his support for gradual emancipation. 432 In the 1780s he gave moral support to a plan proposed by Lafayette to purchase land and free slaves to work on it but declined to participate in the experiment. 414 Washington privately expressed support for emancipation to prominent Methodists Thomas Coke and Francis Asbury in 1785 but declined to sign their petition. 433 In personal correspondence the next year he made clear his desire to see the institution of slavery ended by a gradual legislative process a view that correlated with the mainstream antislavery literature published in the 1780s that Washington possessed. 434 He significantly reduced his purchases of slaves after the war but continued to acquire them in small numbers. 435 In 1788 Washington declined a suggestion from a leading French abolitionist Jacques Brissot to establish an abolitionist society in Virginia stating that although he supported the idea the time was not yet right. 436 Historian Philip D. Morgan wrote that Washington was determined not to risk national unity. 437 Washington never responded to any of the antislavery petitions he received and the subject was not mentioned in either his last address to Congress or his Farewell Address. 438 The first clear indication that Washington seriously intended to free his slaves appears in a letter written to his secretary Tobias Lear in 1794. 439 Washington instructed Lear to find buyers for his land in western Virginia explaining in a private coda that he was doing so to liberate a certain species of property which I possess very repugnantly to my own feelings . 440 The plan along with others Washington considered in 1795 and 1796 could not be realized because he failed to find buyers for his land his reluctance to break up slave families and the refusal of the Custis heirs to help prevent such separations by freeing their dower slaves at the same time. 441 On July 9 1799 Washington finished making his last will; the longest provision concerned slavery. All his slaves were to be freed after the death of his wife. Washington said he did not free them immediately because his slaves intermarried with his wifes dower slaves. He forbade their sale or transportation out of Virginia. The provision also provided that old and young freed people be taken care of indefinitely; younger ones were to be taught to read and write and placed in suitable occupations. 442 Washington emancipated 123 slaves one of the few large slave-holding Virginians during the Revolutionary Era to do so. 443 444 On January 1 1801 one year after George Washingtons death Martha Washington signed an order to free his slaves. Many of them having never strayed far from Mount Vernon were reluctant to leave; others refused to abandon spouses or children still held as dower slaves by the Custis estate and also stayed with or near Martha. 445 Following Washingtons instructions in his will funds were used to feed and clothe the young aged and infirm slaves until the early 1830s. 446 Historical reputation and legacy Further information: Legacy of George Washington and Historical rankings of presidents of the United States See also: Cultural depictions of George Washington Washington the Constable a 1797 portrait by Gilbert Stuart Washingtons legacy endures as one of the most influential in American history since he served as commander-in-chief of the Continental Army a hero of the Revolution and the first president of the United States . Various historians maintain that he also was a dominant factor in Americas founding. 447 Revolutionary War comrade Henry Lee eulogized him as First in war first in peace and first in the hearts of his countrymen . 448 Lees words became the hallmark by which Washingtons reputation was impressed upon the American memory with some biographers regarding him as the great exemplar of republicanism. He set many precedents for the national government and the presidency in particular and he was called the Father of His Country as early as 1778. o 450 451 Washington is among the highest-ranked U.S. Presidents. 452 Washington became an international symbol for liberation and nationalism as the leader of the first successful revolution against a colonial empire. The Federalists made him the symbol of their party but the Jeffersonians continued to distrust his influence for years and delayed building the Washington Monument . 453 Washington was elected a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences on January 31 1781. 454 In 1879 Congress proclaimed Washingtons Birthday to be a federal holiday. 455 Through a congressional joint resolution Public Law 94-479 passed on January 19 1976 with an effective appointment date of July 4 1976 he was posthumously appointed to the grade of General of the Armies of the United States during the American Bicentennial . President Gerald Ford stated that Washington would rank first among all officers of the Army past and present . p 457 On March 13 1978 Washington was militarily promoted to the rank of General of the Armies . 458 In 1809 Mason Locke Weems wrote a hagiographic biography to honor Washington. 459 Historian Ron Chernow maintains that Weems attempted to humanize Washington making him look less stern and to inspire patriotism and morality and to foster enduring myths such as Washingtons refusal to lie about damaging his fathers cherry tree. 460 461 Weems accounts have never been proven or disproven. 462 Historian John Ferling however maintains that Washington remains the only founder and president ever to be referred to as godlike and points out that his character has been the most scrutinized by historians. 463 Biographer Douglas Southall Freeman concluded The great big thing stamped across that man is character. Expanding on Freemans assessment historian David Hackett Fischer defined Washingtons character as integrity self-discipline courage absolute honesty resolve and decision but also forbearance decency and respect for others . 464 Polls of historians have consistently placed Washington among the highest-ranked of presidents. 465 466 In the 21st century Washingtons reputation has been critically scrutinized. Ron Chernow describes Washington as always trying to be even-handed in dealing with the Natives. He states that Washington hoped they would abandon their itinerant hunting life and adapt to fixed agricultural communities in the manner of white settlers. He also maintains that Washington never advocated outright confiscation of tribal land or the forcible removal of tribes and that he berated American settlers who abused natives admitting that he held out no hope for peaceful relations as long as frontier settlers entertain the opinion that there is not the same crime or indeed no crime at all in killing a native as in killing a white man. 467 By contrast Colin G. Calloway wrote that Washington had a lifelong obsession with getting Indian land either for himself or for his nation and initiated policies and campaigns that had devastating effects in Indian country. 468 He stated: The growth of the nation demanded the dispossession of Indian people. Washington hoped the process could be bloodless and that Indian people would give up their lands for a fair price and move away. But if Indians refused and resisted as they often did he felt he had no choice but to extirpate them and that the expeditions he sent to destroy Indian towns were therefore entirely justified. 469 Along with other Founding Fathers Washington has been condemned for holding enslaved people. Though he expressed the desire to see the abolition of slavery come through legislation he did not initiate or support any initiatives for bringing about its end. This has led to calls from some activists to remove his name from public buildings and his statue from public spaces. 470 Places namesakes and monuments Further information: List of memorials to George Washington and List of statues of George Washington The Washington Monument Shrine of Democracy Mount Rushmore National Memorial Many places and monuments have been named in honor of Washington most notably Washington D.C. the capital of the United States and the state of Washington the only U.S. state to be named after a president. 471 On February 21 1885 the Washington Monument was dedicated. The 555-foot marble obelisk which stands on the National Mall in Washington D.C. was built between 18481854 and 18791884 and was the tallest structure in the world between 1884 and 1889. 472 Washington appears as one of four U.S. presidents on the Shrine of Democracy a colossal statue by Gutzon Borglum on Mount Rushmore in South Dakota . 473 A number of secondary schools and universities are named in honor of Washington including George Washington University and Washington University in St. Louis . 474 475 Currency and postage Further information: Presidents of the United States on U.S. postage stamps Washington appears on contemporary U.S. currency including the one-dollar bill the Presidential one-dollar coin and the quarter-dollar coin the Washington quarter . Washington and Benjamin Franklin appeared on the nations first postage stamps in 1847. Washington has since appeared on many postage issues more than any other person. 476 Washington issue of 1862 WashingtonFranklin issue of 1917 Washington quarter dollar Washington Presidential one-dollar coin Washington on the 2009 dollar bill See also Further information: List of George Washington articles Founders Online List of American Revolutionary War battles List of Continental Forces in the American Revolutionary War Timeline of the American Revolution The Washington Papers Notes Contemporaneous records used the Old Style Julian calendar and the Annunciation Style of enumerating years recording his birth as February 11 1731. The British Calendar New Style Act 1750 implemented in 1752 altered the official British dating method to the Gregorian calendar with the start of the year on January 1 it had been March 25. These changes resulted in dates being moved forward 11 days and an advance of one year for those between January 1 and March 25. For a further explanation see Old Style and New Style dates . 2 Washington received his license through the college whose charter gave it the authority to appoint Virginia county surveyors. There is no evidence that he actually attended classes there. 11 The mid-16th-century word Indian described the Indigenous Peoples of the Americas. More modern terms for Indians include American Indian and Native American and Indigenous Peoples. 24 A second Virginia regiment was raised under Colonel William Byrd III and also allocated to the expedition. 40 Some descendants of West Ford a slave of John Augustine Washington s maintain based on family oral history that Ford was fathered by George Washington though historians dispute his paternity. 49 50 In a letter of September 20 1765 Washington protested to Robert Cary Co. that the low prices he received for his tobacco and for the inflated prices he was forced to pay on second-rate goods from London. 71 Congress initially directed the war effort in June 1776 with the committee known as Board of War and Ordnance ; this was succeeded by the Board of War in July 1777 which eventually included members of the military. 104 Thomas Jefferson praised Washington for his moderation and virtue in relinquishing command. Reportedly upon being informed of Washingtons plans by painter Benjamin West King George III remarked: If he does that he will be the greatest man in the world. 198 The Society of the Cincinnati was formed by Henry Knox in May 1783 to carry on the memory of the War of Independence and to establish a fraternity of officers. The Society was named after Cincinnatus a famous Roman military leader who relinquished his position after his Roman victory at Algidus 458 BC . However he had reservations about some of the societys precepts including heredity requirements for membership and receiving money from foreign interests. 200 Starting in 1774 14 men served as President of the Continental Congress but bore no relationship to the presidency established under Article II of the Constitution. Under the Articles of Confederation Congress called its presiding officer President of the United States in Congress Assembled but this position had no national executive powers. 222 There has been debate over whether Washington added so help me God to the end of the oath. 228 The first account of Washingtons death was written by doctors Craik and Brown published in The Times of Alexandria five days after his death on December 19 1799. The complete text can be found in The Eclectic Medical Journal 1858. 352 Modern medical experts who blamed medical malpractice include Morens and Wallenborn in 1999 353 354 Cheatham in 2008 355 and Vadakan in 2005. 356 The Constitution came under attack in Pennsylvania and Washington wrote to Richard Peters It would seem from the public Gazettes that the minority in your State are preparing for another attack of the now adopted Government; how formidable it may be I know not. But that Providence which has hitherto smiled on the honest endeavours of the well meaning part of the People of this Country will not I trust withdraw its support from them at this crisis. 385 The earliest known image in which Washington is identified as the Father of His Country is in the frontispiece of a 1779 German-language almanac with calculations by David Rittenhouse and published by Francis Bailey in Lancaster County Pennsylvania. Der Gantz Neue Verbesserte Nord-Americanische Calendar has a personification of Fame holding a trumpet to her lips juxtaposed with an image of Washington and the words Der Landes Vater the father of the country or the father of the land . 449 In Portraits Biographical Sketches of the United States Armys Senior Officer William Gardner Bell states that Washington was recalled to military service from his retirement in 1798 and Congress passed legislation that would have made him General of the Armies of the United States but his services were not required in the field and the appointment was not made until the Bicentennial in 1976 when it was bestowed posthumously as a commemorative honor. 456 References Randall 1997 p. 303. The history of the calendar . BBC History . No. January 2014. Archived from the original on August 30 2023 . Retrieved August 30 2023 . Chernow 2010 pp. 36. Ferling 2002 p. 3; Chernow 2010 pp. 57. Ferling 2009 p. 9; Chernow 2010 pp. 68. a b Ten Facts About Washington Slavery . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association . Archived from the original on May 22 2018 . Retrieved May 22 2018 . Owners of Mount Vernon . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on August 30 2023 . Retrieved August 30 2023 . Chernow 2010 pp. 1012; Ferling 2002 p. 14; Ferling 1988 pp. 56. The Rules of Civility and Decent Behaviour . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on May 21 2024 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Chernow 2010 pp. 10 19; Ferling 2002 pp. 1415; Randall 1997 p. 36. a b George Washingtons Professional Surveys . Founders Online . U.S. National Archives. Archived from the original on November 6 2018 . Retrieved July 11 2019 . Fitzpatrick 1936 v. 19 p. 510; Chernow 2010 pp. 2223. Chernow 2010 p. 24. Warren Jack D. Jr. Washingtons Journey to Barbados . Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on February 27 2024 . Retrieved April 12 2024 . Flexner 1974 p. 8; Chernow 2010 p. 25. Chernow 2010 pp. 26 98. Anderson 2007 pp. 3132; Chernow 2010 pp. 2627 31. Ferling 2009 pp. 1516. Conotocarious . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on August 9 2021 . Retrieved August 9 2021 . Ferling 2009 pp. 1518; Lengel 2005 pp. 2324; Randall 1997 p. 74; Chernow 2010 pp. 2627 31. Fitzpatrick 1936 19 pp. 510511; Ferling 2009 pp. 1518. Chernow 2010 pp. 3132; Ferling 2009 pp. 1819. Chernow 2010 pp. 4142. Cresswell 2010 p. 222. Chernow 2010 p. 42. Ferling 2009 pp. 2425. Ferling 2009 pp. 2325; Ellis 2004 pp. 1517. Ferling 2009 pp. 2425; Chernow 2010 pp. 4245. Ferling 2009 p. 26. Ferling 2009 pp. 1924; Ellis 2004 p. 13; Alden 1996 pp. 1315. Preston David October 2019. When Young George Washington Started a War . Smithsonian . Archived from the original on March 1 2024 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . a b Chernow 2010 p. 53. Alden 1996 p. 37; Ferling 1988 pp. 3536. Alden 1996 pp. 3746; Ferling 1988 pp. 3536; Chernow 2010 pp. 5758. Fitzpatrick 1936 p. 511. Ferling 2009 pp. 2830. Alden 1996 pp. 3746. Ellis 2004 p. 24; Ferling 2009 pp. 3031. Ferling 2009 pp. 3132 3839. Flexner 1965 pp. 206207. Flexner 1965 p. 194; Fitzpatrick 1936 p. 512. Fitzpatrick 1936 p. 512; Chernow 2010 pp. 8990; Flexner 1965 pp. 194 206207. Ferling 2009 p. 43; Chernow 2010 pp. 9091; Lengel 2005 pp. 7576 81. Fitzpatrick 1936 pp. 511512; Flexner 1965 p. 138; Fischer 2004 pp. 1516; Ellis 2004 p. 38. Chernow 2010 pp. 9293; Ferling 2002 pp. 3233. Ferling 2002 pp. 3334; Wiencek 2003 p. 69. Chernow 2010 pp. 9798; Fischer 2004 p. 14. Chernow 2010 p. 103. West Ford . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on October 9 2021 . Retrieved October 9 2021 . Abramson Jill March 7 2022. Did George Washington Have an Enslaved Son? . The New Yorker . Archived from the original on May 23 2024 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Chernow 2010 p. 103; Flexner 1974 pp. 4243. Coe Alexis June 20 2020. The Father of the Nation George Washington Was Also a Doting Dad to His Family . Smithsonian . Archived from the original on September 21 2023 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Wiencek 2003 pp. 910 6769 8081. Rasmussen Tilton 1999 p. 100; Chernow 2010 p. 184. Ferling 2002 pp. 4445; Grizzard 2002 pp. 135137. a b Ellis 2004 pp. 4142 48. Bish Jim Spring 2010. Hugh West and the West Familys Momentous Role in Founding and Developing Alexandria and Fairfax and Loudoun Counties Virginia PDF . The Alexandria Chronicle . Alexandria Historical Society. pp. 1314. Archived PDF from the original on April 23 2021 . Retrieved May 10 2020 . In 1755 Hugh West Jr. gave up his seat in Fairfax County and won a House of Burgess election in Frederick County defeating Colonel George Washington. This defeat was Washingtons only electoral loss. Hugh West Jr. served as a Frederick County burgess until 1758 when he was defeated by Washington. To George Washington from Adam Stephen 23 December 1755 . National Historical Publications and Records Commission The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. 1755. Archived from the original on May 13 2021 . Retrieved May 10 2020 . GW kept a copy of the Frederick County poll sheet c. 10 Dec. DLC:GW in his papers with the names of the 40 men who voted for him and the names of the 271 men who voted for Hugh West and 270 who voted for Thomas Swearingen. House of Burgesses . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on May 7 2021 . Retrieved April 25 2020 . Enclosure V: Frederick County Poll Sheet 1758 24 July 1758 . National Historical Publications and Records Commission The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. 1758. Archived from the original on January 23 2021 . Retrieved May 8 2020 . Ferling 2009 pp. 4954 68. Ellis 2004 pp. 4950. Chernow 2010 p. 141. Tobacco . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on September 29 2023 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . a b Chernow 2010 p. 122. Ferling 2002 pp. 4344; Ellis 2004 p. 44. Chernow 2010 p. 161. Higginbotham 2001 p. 154. Chernow 2010 p. 136. Chernow 2010 pp. 137 148; Taylor 2016 pp. 61 75. Chernow 2010 p. 138; Ferling 2009 p. 68. Taylor 2016 p. 103. a b c The Pursuit of Land . The Lehrman Institute. June 22 2021. Archived from the original on August 12 2021 . Retrieved July 11 2021 . Freeman 1968 pp. 174176; Taylor 2016 p. 75. Randall 1997 p. 262; Chernow 2010 p. 166; Taylor 2016 p. 119. Alden 1996 p. 101. Chernow 2010 p. 167. Ferling 1988 p. 100; Ford Hunt Fitzpatrick 1904 v. 19 p. 11. Ferling 1988 p. 108; Taylor 2016 pp. 126127. Taylor 2016 p. 132. Chernow 2010 p. 181. Chernow 2010 p. 182. Taylor 2016 pp. 132133; Ellis 2004 pp. 6768; Chernow 2010 pp. 185186; Fitzpatrick 1936 p. 514. Rasmussen Tilton 1999 p. 294; Fitzpatrick 1936 p. 514; Taylor 2016 pp. 141142; Ferling 2009 pp. 8687. Commission from the Continental Congress 19 June 1775 . National Historical Publications and Records Commission The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. 1775. Archived from the original on August 15 2020 . Retrieved May 26 2020 . Instructions from the Continental Congress 22 June 1775 . National Historical Publications and Records Commission The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. 1775. Archived from the original on March 27 2021 . Retrieved May 26 2020 . Chernow 2010 pp. 190191; Ferling 2002 p. 108. Ferling 2002 pp. 109110; Puls 2008 p. 31. Morgan 2000 pp. 290291. Collins Elizabeth M. March 4 2013. Black Soldiers in the Revolutionary War . U.S. Army. Archived from the original on August 10 2021 . Retrieved August 10 2021 . Taylor 2016 p. 231. Roberts Andrew 2021. The Last King of America: The Misunderstood Reign of George III . Penguin Random House. p. 446. ISBN 978-0241413333 . Taylor 2016 pp. 121123. Taylor 2016 pp. 121122 143. Chernow 2010 p. 193. Taylor 2016 p. 143. Isaacson 2003 p. 303; Ferling 2002 p. 112; Taylor 2016 p. 143; Fitzpatrick 1936 p. 514. Ferling 2002 pp. 112113 116. Chernow 2010 pp. 57 160 166 201. Chernow 2010 p. 208; Taylor 2016 pp. 133135. Lengel 2005 pp. 124126; Ferling 2002 pp. 116119. Ferling 2009 p. 100. Henderson 2009 p. 47. a b Freedman 2008 p. 42. Chernow 2010 pp. 227228; Lengel 2005 pp. 124126; Ferling 2002 pp. 116119; Taylor 2016 pp. 144 153154. Chernow 2010 pp. 229230. Chernow 2010 p. 235. Fitzpatrick 1936 pp. 514515; Taylor 2016 pp. 162163. Chernow 2010 p. 237. Chernow 2010 pp. 244245; Taylor 2016 pp. 162163. Ellis 2004 pp. 9596; Chernow 2010 p. 244. Taylor 2016 p. 164. McCullough 2005 pp. 186195. Chernow 2010 p. 240; Davis 1975 pp. 9394; Taylor 2016 p. 164. Taylor 2016 p. 165. Davis 1975 p. 136; Chernow 2010 p. 257. Alden 1996 p. 137; Taylor 2016 p. 165. Taylor 2016 pp. 166167; Farner 1996 p. 24. Fischer 2004 pp. 224226; Taylor 2016 pp. 166169. Taylor 2016 pp. 166167 169. Ketchum 1999 p. 235; Chernow 2010 p. 264. Taylor 2016 p. 169. Chernow 2010 pp. 270273. Chernow 2010 pp. 270272; Randall 1997 p. 319. a b Willcox Arnstein 1988 p. 164. Chernow 2010 p. 273. Chernow 2010 pp. 273274; Fischer 2004 pp. 215219; Taylor 2016 p. 171. Fischer 2004 pp. 228230. Chernow 2010 pp. 270 275276; Ferling 2002 pp. 146147; Fischer 2004 pp. 170 232234 254 405. Fischer 2004 p. 254; Ketchum 1999 pp. 306307; Alden 1996 p. 146. Alden 1996 p. 145. Ketchum 1999 pp. 361364; Fischer 2004 p. 339; Chernow 2010 pp. 276278. Taylor 2016 p. 172. Dryfoos Delaney July 5 2018. A true Fourth of July celebration: This town had a reading of Declaration of Independence . NJ.com . Burger Joanna; Gochfeld Michael 2000. 25 Nature Spectacles in New Jersey . Rutgers University Press. p. 205. ISBN 978-0-8135-2766-6 . Archived from the original on April 8 2023 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Chernow 2010 pp. 285286. Lawler Andrew April 16 2020. How a smallpox epidemic nearly derailed the American Revolution . National Geographic . Archived from the original on January 5 2024 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Fischer 2004 p. 151. Taylor 2016 p. 172; Fischer 2004 p. 367. Ferling 2007 p. 188. Chernow 2010 pp. 300301. Randall 1997 pp. 340341; Chernow 2010 pp. 301304. Chernow 2010 pp. 312313. Alden 1996 p. 163. Gelb Norman May 2003. Winter of Discontent . Smithsonian . Archived from the original on February 29 2024 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Ferling 2002 p. 186; Alden 1996 pp. 165 167; Freedman 2008 p. 30. Alden 1996 p. 165. Heydt Bruce 2005. Vexatious Evils: George Washington and the Conway Cabal . American History . 40 5: 5073. Flexner 1965 p. 138; Randall 1997 pp. 354355. Randall 1997 pp. 342 356 359; Ferling 2009 p. 172; Alden 1996 p. 168. Chernow 2010 p. 336. Trickey Erick April 26 2017. The Prussian Nobleman Who Helped Save the American Revolution . Smithsonian . Archived from the original on May 27 2024 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Taylor 2016 p. 188. Ferling 2007 p. 296. Alden 1996 pp. 176177; Ferling 2002 pp. 195198. Chernow 2010 p. 344. Nagy 2016 p. 274. Rose 2006 pp. 75 224 258261. Chernow 2010 pp. 378387; Philbrick 2016 p. 35. Adams 1928 pp. 365366; Philbrick 2016 pp. 250251. Chernow 2010 p. 380; Palmer 2010 p. 203; Flexner 1991 pp. 119221; Rose 2006 p. 196. Chernow 2010 pp. 378 380381; Lengel 2005 p. 322; Adams 1928 p. 366; Philbrick 2016 pp. 280282. Adams 1928 p. 365; Palmer 2010 pp. 306 315 319 320. Van Doren 1941 pp. 194195; Adams 1928 p. 366; Palmer 2010 p. 410. Palmer 2010 pp. 370371; Middlekauff 2015 p. 232. Flexner 1991 p. 386; Rose 2006 p. 212. Taylor 2016 p. 230. Alden 1996 p. 184. Grizzard 2002 p. 303. Chernow 2010 p. 360. Koehler Rhiannon Fall 2018. Hostile Nations: Quantifying the Destruction of the Sullivan-Clinton Genocide of 1779 . American Indian Quarterly . 42 4: 427453. doi : 10.5250amerindiquar.42.4.0427 . ISSN 0095-182X . S2CID 165519714 . Mann 2008 p. 108. Taylor 2016 p. 234. Taylor 2016 pp. 234235. Alden 1996 pp. 187188. Lancaster Plumb 1985 p. 311. Alden 1996 pp. 197199 206. Alden 1996 p. 193. Taylor 2016 p. 339. Chernow 2010 p. 403. Alden 1996 pp. 198199; Chernow 2010 pp. 403404. Lengel 2005 p. 335. Chernow 2010 p. 413. Riley Edward M. July 1948. St. George Tuckers Journal of the Siege of Yorktown 1781 . The William and Mary Quarterly . 5 3. Omohundro Institute of Early American History and Culture: 375395. doi : 10.23071923466 . JSTOR 1923466 . Alden 1996 pp. 198 201; Chernow 2010 pp. 372373 418; Lengel 2005 p. 337. Mann 2008 p. 38; Lancaster Plumb 1985 p. 254; Chernow 2010 p. 419. Chernow 2010 p. 419. Fleming Thomas 2007. The Perils of Peace: Americas Struggle for Survival After Yorktown . Smithsonian. pp. 194 312. ISBN 978-0061139109 . Taylor 2016 pp. 313315. Kohn 1970 pp. 187220. Alden 1996 p. 209. Washington George 1783. Sentiments on a Peace Establishment . National Historical Publications and Records Commission The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. Archived from the original on July 1 2018 . Retrieved July 20 2018 . Washington George 1799. Letter to Continental Army November 2 1783 Farewell Orders; Letter to Henry Knox November 2 1783 . George Washington Papers 17411799: Series 3b Varick Transcripts . Library of Congress. p. 343. Archived from the original on August 21 2013 . Retrieved November 13 2011 . Chernow 2010 pp. 446 448449 451; Puls 2008 pp. 184186. Randall 1997 p. 405. Taylor 2016 p. 319. Alden 1996 p. 210; Chernow 2010 pp. 451452 455. Chernow 2010 p. 454; Taylor 2016 pp. 319320. Chernow 2010 pp. 454455. Chernow 2010 pp. 444 461 498; Ferling 2009 p. xx; Parsons 1898 p. 96; Brumwell 2012 p. 412. Chernow 2010 p. 444. Randall 1997 p. 410; Flexner 1974 pp. 182183; Dalzell Dalzell 1998 p. 112. Ferling 2009 p. 246. Chernow 2010 p. 462; Ferling 2009 pp. 255256. Ferling 2009 pp. 247255. Ferling 2009 pp. 246247; Chernow 2010 pp. 552553; Ellis 2004 p. 167. Wulf 2012 p. 52; Subak 2018 pp. 4344. Royal Gift Donkey . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on July 9 2021 . Retrieved July 6 2021 . Alden 1996 p. 221; Chernow 2010 p. 518; Ferling 2009 p. 266. Chernow 2010 pp. 517519. Taylor 2016 pp. 373374; Ferling 2009 p. 266. Chernow 2010 p. 523; Taylor 2016 pp. 373374. Chernow 2010 pp. 220221; Ferling 2009 p. 266. Ferling 2009 p. 266; Chernow 2010 pp. 218 220224 520526. Chernow 2010 pp. 520521 523 526 529; Unger 2013 p. 33. Elliot Jonathan ed. 1827. The Debates in the Several State Conventions: Vols. I-V . Liberty Fund . Published by editor. Ferling 1988 pp. 359360. a b Alden 1996 pp. 226227. Alden 1996 p. 229. a b Duties and History . College of William Mary . Archived from the original on March 7 2021 . Retrieved April 2 2021 . Washington George April 30 1788. George Washington to Samuel Griffin April 30 1788 . Library of Congress . Archived from the original on June 11 2021 . Retrieved April 2 2021 . Jensen 1948 pp. 178179; Unger 2013 pp. 61 146; Jillson Wilson 1994 p. 77. Chernow 2010 pp. 559560; Ferling 2009 p. 361. Chernow 2010 p. 551. Ferling 2009 p. 274. Ferling 2009 pp. 274275; Chernow 2010 pp. 559561. Washington George 1789. April 1789 . National Historical Publications and Records Commission The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. Archived from the original on February 26 2020 . Retrieved February 26 2020 . Irving 1857 p. 475; Alden 1996 p. 236. Cooke 2002 p. 4; Chernow 2010 pp. 550551; Fitzpatrick 1936 p. 522. Chernow 2010 pp. 566567; Randall 1997 p. 448. Cooke 2002 p. 4; Chernow 2010 p. 568. Randall 1997 p. 448; Alden 1996 p. 236. Chernow 2010 p. 552; Fitzpatrick 1936 v. 19 p. 522. Unger 2013 p. 76. Bassett 1906 p. 155. Unger 2013 pp. 236237. Chernow 2010 pp. 674675. Ellis 2004 pp. 197198; Unger 2013 pp. 236237. Genovese 2009 p. 589; Unger 2013 pp. 236237. Chernow 2010 pp. 696698; Randall 1997 p. 478. a b c Cooke 2002 p. 5. Chernow 2010 p. 575. Chernow 2010 p. 514. Ferling 2009 pp. 281282; Cooke 2002 pp. 45. Cooke 2002 p. 5; Banning 1974 p. 5. Elkins McKitrick 1995 p. 290. Ellis Richard J. 1999. Founding the American Presidency . Rowman Littlefield. p. 133. ISBN 978-0-8476-9499-0 . a b Cooke 2002 p. 7. Chernow 2010 pp. 585 609; Henriques 2006 p. 65; Novak Novak 2007 pp. 144146. Chernow 2010 p. 758; Taylor 2016 pp. 399400. Taylor 2016 pp. 399400. Rowe Jill E. 2016. Invisible in Plain Sight: Self-Determination Strategies of Free Blacks in the Old Northwest . Peter Lang. p. 37. ISBN 978-1-4539-1900-2 . Finkelman Paul April 9 2014. Slavery and the Founders: Race and Liberty in the Age of Jefferson . Routledge. p. 77. ISBN 978-1-317-52025-2 . The Northwest Ordinance . visitthecapitol.gov . U.S. Capitol . Archived from the original on August 31 2023 . Retrieved August 31 2023 . Congress reenacted the ordinance in 1789 and subsequently extended most of its provisions to other western territories as the United States became a transcontinental nation. Bassett 1906 pp. 187189. First Congress Third Session February 18 1791. An Act for the admission of the State of Vermont into this Union . The Avalon Project . Yale Law School. Archived from the original on October 18 2014 . Retrieved November 24 2014 . Chernow 2005 p. 345. Banning 1974 pp. 57. Cooke 2002 pp. 78. Cooke 2002 p. 8. Sobel 1968 p. 27. Banning 1974 p. 9; Sobel 1968 p. 30. Chernow 2010 pp. 673674. Chernow 2010 pp. 515 627630 648650; Randall 1997 pp. 452 463 468471. Banning 1974 p. 8; Cooke 2002 p. 9. Cooke 2002 p. 9; Fitzpatrick 1936 v. 19 p. 523. Elkins McKitrick 1995 pp. 240 285 290 361. Cooke 2002 p. 9; Chernow 2005 p. 427. Ferling 2013 pp. 222 283284 301302. Ferling 2013 pp. 301302. Chernow 2005 pp. 342343. Kohn 1972 pp. 567568 570. a b Chernow 2010 pp. 719721; Puls 2008 p. 219. Coakley 1996 pp. 4349. Chernow 2010 pp. 721 726; Kohn 1972 pp. 567584. Kohn 1972 pp. 567584. Ellis 2004 pp. 225226. Elkins McKitrick 1995 pp. 335354. Honorary French Citizenship . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on February 2 2019 . Retrieved February 1 2019 . Elkins McKitrick 1995 ch. 9. Chernow 2010 p. 730. Ferling 2009 p. 340. Estes 2000 pp. 393422; Estes 2001 pp. 127158. Ferling 2009 p. 344. Ferling 2009 p. 343. Akers 2002 p. 27. Grizzard 2005 p. 263; Lengel 2005 p. 357. Fitzpatrick 1936 p. 523; Cooke 2002 pp. 910; Chernow 2010 p. 665. Waldman Braun 2009 p. 149. Harless Richard 2018. Native American Policy . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on October 26 2018 . Retrieved October 26 2018 . Calloway 2018 p. 2. Flexner 1969 p. 304; Taylor 2016 p. 406. a b c Cooke 2002 p. 10. Grizzard 2002 pp. 256257; Puls 2008 pp. 207208. Chernow 2010 pp. 667678; Gaff 2004 p. xvii; Waldman Braun 2009 p. 149. Maulden Kristopher 2016. A Show of Force: The Northwest Indian War and the Early American State . Ohio Valley History . 16 4: 2040. Archived from the original on May 4 2022 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Cooke 2002 p. 10; Chernow 2010 p. 668. Taylor 2016 p. 406; Chernow 2010 p. 668. Cooke 2002 p. 14; Taylor 2016 p. 406. Chernow 2010 pp. 674675 678; Ferling 2009 p. 362; Randall 1997 p. 484. Chernow 2010 p. 687. Ferling 1988 p. 421; Randall 1997 p. 482; Chernow 2010 pp. 675 678. Chernow 2005 p. 403. Chernow 2010 p. 687; Cooke 2002 pp. 1011. Ferling 2009 pp. 299 304 308311; Banning 1974 p. 2; Cooke 2002 pp. 1112. Cooke 2002 pp. 1213. Chernow 2010 p. 692; Cooke 2002 p. 12. Cooke 2002 p. 13. Chernow 2010 p. 713. Chernow 2010 pp. 726727; Cooke 2002 p. 15. Randall 1997 pp. 491492; Chernow 2010 pp. 752754. Peabody Bruce G. 2001. George Washington Presidential Term Limits and the Problem of Reluctant Political Leadership . Presidential Studies Quarterly . 31 3: 439453. doi : 10.1111j.0360-4918.2001.00180.x . JSTOR 27552322 . Spalding Garrity 1996 p. 58; Lurie 2018 . Spalding Garrity 1996 pp. 4647. Flexner 1972 p. 292; Chernow 2010 pp. 752753; Spalding Garrity 1996 p. 4744; Hayes 2017 pp. 287298. Chernow 2010 p. 754; Lurie 2018 . Chernow 2010 p. 755; Lurie 2018 . Randall 1997 p. 492; Boller 1963 p. 47. Fishman Pederson Rozell 2001 pp. 119120; Gregg Spalding 1999 pp. 199216. Chernow 2010 p. 133. Randall 1997 p. 492; Cooke 2002 pp. 1819; Flexner 1972 pp. 292297; Avlon 2017 p. 223; Boller 1963 p. 47. Avlon 2017 p. 280. Spalding Garrity 1996 p. 143. Sparks 1839 p. 444. Flexner 1972 p. 292; Spalding Garrity 1996 p. 142. Chernow 2010 pp. 752754. Breen Eleanor E.; White Esther C. 2006. A Pretty Considerable Distillery: Excavating George Washingtons Whiskey Distillery PDF . Quarterly Bulletin of the Archeological Society of Virginia . 61 4: 20920. Archived from the original PDF on December 24 2011. Ellis 2004 pp. 255261. Flexner 1974 p. 386. Randall 1997 p. 497. Flexner 1974 pp. 376377; Bell 1992 p. 64. Bell 1992 p. 64. Fitzpatrick 1936 p. 474 vol. 36. Kohn 1975 pp. 225242; Grizzard 2005 p. 264. Chernow 2010 p. 708. Hirschfeld 1997 pp. 4445; Ferling 2009 p. 351. Chernow 2010 pp. 704705. The Death of George Washington . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on March 23 2021 . Retrieved March 13 2021 . Chernow 2010 pp. 806810; Morens 1999 pp. 18451849. Death Defied . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on December 13 2018 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Chernow 2010 pp. 806807; Lear 1799 p. 257. a b Chernow 2010 pp. 806810. Ellis 2004 p. 269. Ferling 2009 p. 365. Chernow 2010 p. 808. Flexner 1974 pp. 401402; Chernow 2010 pp. 808809. Irving 1857 p. 359. Chernow 2010 pp. 808810. Irving 1857 pp. 374375. a b Chernow 2010 pp. 810811. Chernow 2010 p. 814. Newton Freeman Bickley 1858 pp. 273274. Wallenborn 1999 ; Morens 1999 pp. 18451849. Chernow 2010 p. 809. Cheatham 2008 . Vadakan 2005 . Gardner Andrew G. 2013. How Did Washington Make His Millions? . CW Journal . The Colonial Williamsburg Foundation. Archived from the original on February 28 2024 . Retrieved August 30 2023 . Sauter Michael B. November 5 2020. From Washington to Trump: This is the net worth of every American president . USA Today . Archived from the original on March 20 2023 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Craughwell 2009 pp. 7779. a b The Tomb . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on April 30 2018 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Boorstin 2010 pp. 349350. Strickland 1840 pp. 1114; Carlson 2016 chapter 1. Strickland 1840 pp. 1114. Ferling 2002 p. 16; Randall 1997 pp. 34 436; Chernow 2010 pp. 2930. Ferling 2002 p. 16. Founders Online: From George Washington to Charles Lawrence 20 June 1768 . founders.archives.gov . Archived from the original on January 14 2023 . Retrieved January 21 2023 . Ferling 2002 p. 16; Chernow 2010 pp. 2930. Chernow 2010 pp. 123125. Chernow 2010 p. 30. Fessenden Maris June 9 2015. How George Washington Did His Hair . Smithsonian . Archived from the original on April 30 2024 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Schultz Colin November 7 2014. George Washington Didnt Have Wooden Teeth They Were Ivory . Smithsonian . Archived from the original on April 24 2024 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . George Washingtons false teeth not wooden . NBC News . January 27 2005. Archived from the original on December 25 2023 . Retrieved June 11 2024 . Etter William M. Wooden Teeth Myth . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on January 10 2024 . Retrieved June 11 2024 . Chernow 2010 pp. 30 290 437439 642643. Chernow 2010 p. 124. Chernow 2010 pp. 124 469. Chernow 2010 p. 469. Chernow 2010 p. 134. a b Tsakiridis 2018 . Chernow 2010 p. 6; Morrison 2009 p. 136; Alden 1996 pp. 2 26; Randall 1997 p. 17; Tsakiridis 2018 . Chernow 2010 p. 130; Thompson 2008 p. 40; Tsakiridis 2018 . Frazer 2012 pp. 198199; Chernow 2010 pp. 119 132; Tsakiridis 2018 . Chernow 2010 pp. 131 470; Johnstone 1919 pp. 87195; Frazer 2012 pp. 201203; Tsakiridis 2018 . Randall 1997 p. 67; Tsakiridis 2018 . Washington George September 7 1788. Letter to Richard Peters September 7 1788 . National Historical Publications and Records Commission The U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. Archived from the original on February 12 2019 . Retrieved February 11 2019 . Chernow 2010 p. 131; Tsakiridis 2018 . Chernow 2010 pp. 131132. Novak Novak 2007 p. 95; Tsakiridis 2018 . Chernow 2010 pp. 131132; Morrison 2009 p. 136; Tsakiridis 2018 . Boller 1963 p. 125. Chernow 2010 p. 131. a b Wood 2001 p. 313. Novak Novak 2007 p. 117 n. 52. Chernow 2010 pp. 132 500; Morrison 2009 p. 136; Stavish 2007 pp. XIX XXI; Immekus 2018 . Chernow 2010 pp. 27 704. Randall 1997 p. 67; Chernow 2010 p. 27. Immekus 2018 . A Brief History . The George Washington Masonic National Memorial Association. Archived from the original on March 13 2024 . Retrieved May 19 2024 . Henriques 2006 p. 146. Willcox Arnstein 1988 pp. 4142. a b Maloy Mark April 6 2021. The Founding Fathers Views of Slavery . Archived from the original on April 6 2021 . Retrieved July 3 2021 . a b The Growth of Mount Vernons Enslaved Community . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on July 13 2021 . Retrieved July 13 2021 . Over the course of George Washingtons life at least 577 enslaved people lived and worked at Mount Vernon. Morgan 2000 p. 279; Ellis 2004 p. 45. Morgan 2000 pp. 279280; Morgan 2005 pp. 405 407 n7; Hirschfeld 1997 p. 12. Thompson Mary V. June 19 2014. William Lee Oney Judge: A Look at George Washington Slavery . allthingsliberty.com . Journal of the American Revolution. Archived from the original on January 27 2022 . Retrieved January 24 2022 . Twohig 2001 p. 116. Morgan 2005 p. 413. Twohig 2001 p. 121; Morgan 2005 p. 426. Furstenberg 2011 p. 260. Morgan 2000 p. 299. Twohig 2001 pp. 122123; Morgan 2000 pp. 283 289. Wiencek 2003 p. 348. Morgan 2000 pp. 286287. a b Twohig 2001 . Morgan 2000 pp. 283 285286. Morgan 2000 pp. 282 283285; Chernow 2010 pp. 112113. Chernow 2010 p. 111; Ferling 2002 p. 46; Schwarz 2001 pp. 27 83. Slave Labor . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on July 2 2018 . Retrieved July 2 2018 . Slave Control . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on February 27 2024 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Chernow 2010 pp. 113114. Blakemore Erin February 16 2015. George Washington Used Legal Loopholes to Avoid Freeing His Slaves . Smithsonian . Archived from the original on January 19 2022 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Chernow 2010 pp. 759763. Morgan 2000 pp. 279287. Morgan 2000 pp. 281282. Morgan 2000 p. 298. Wiencek 2003 pp. 319 348349; Flexner 1974 p. 386; Hirschfeld 1997 p. 2; Ellis 2004 p. 167; Morgan 2000 p. 283. Hirschfeld 1997 p. 3; Morgan 2000 p. 29. Washington George July 7 1799. George Washingtons Last Will and Testament . founders.archive.gov . National Archives and Records Administration . Archived from the original on October 1 2016 . Retrieved February 21 2022 . Ellis 2004 p. 202; Twohig 2001 p. 126. Morgan 2005 pp. 416417. Morgan 2005 p. 417. Ellis 2004 p. 201. Morgan 2000 p. 292. Morgan 2005 pp. 418419; Furstenberg 2011 pp. 273274 284285. Twohig 2001 pp. 122123; Morgan 2005 p. 419; Morgan 2000 p. 289. Furstenberg 2011 p. 280. Twohig 2001 pp. 126127; Morgan 2000 pp. 290 299; Ellis 2004 p. 202. Twohig 2001 pp. 126127; Morgan 2000 p. 297; Ferling 2009 p. 363. Ellis 2004 p. 257. Wiencek 2003 p. 274. Morgan 2005 pp. 423424. Morgan 2005 p. 404. Morgan 2005 pp. 1404405; Wiencek 2003 pp. 35235. A Decision to Free His Slaves . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on August 9 2021 . Retrieved August 9 2021 . Chernow 2010 p. 802. Chernow 2010 p. 815. Ferling 2009 p. xviii. First in War First in Peace and First in the Hearts of His Countrymen . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on July 17 2020 . Retrieved June 7 2021 . Lightner Reeder 1953 p. 133. Unger 2013 pp. 236237; Parry Allison 1991 p. xi; Hindle 2017 p. 92. Father of His Country . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on July 13 2023 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . George Washington . C-SPAN . Presidential Historians Survey. 2021. Archived from the original on August 22 2021 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Cunliffe 1958 pp. 2426. Willard Joseph February 28 1781. To George Washington from Joseph Willard 28 February 1781 . National Archives and Records Administration . Archived from the original on February 21 2017. Ferling 2009 p. 4. Bell 1992 pp. 52 66. How Many U.S. Army Five-star Generals Have There Been and Who Were They? . U.S. Army Center of Military History. 2017. Archived from the original on May 29 2021 . Retrieved November 1 2018 . Kleber Brooks E. June 1978. Washington is Now No. 1: The Story Behind a Promotion . Army . pp. 1415. Archived from the original on February 27 2024 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Weems 1918 p. 22. Chernow 2010 pp. 813814; Levy 2013 pp. 6 217; Weems 1918 p. 22. Delbanco Andrew July 4 1999. Life Literature and the Pursuit of Happiness . The New York Times . Archived from the original on December 31 2023 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Levy 2013 p. 6. Ferling 2009 pp. xviiixix. Fischer 2004 p. 446. Murray Robert K.; Blessing Tim H. 1994. Greatness in the White House: Rating the Presidents from Washington Through Ronald Reagan 2nd updated ed.. Pennsylvania State University Press. pp. 79 15. ISBN 978-0271010892 . Sienas 6th Presidential Expert Poll 19822018 . Archived from the original on July 19 2019 . Retrieved September 24 2019 . Chernow 2010 p. 666. Calloway 2018 p. 38. Ammerman Cassandra October 18 2018. Sitting down with author and historian Colin G. Calloway . OUPblog . Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on June 9 2020 . Retrieved January 21 2023 . Hirsh Michael June 24 2020. If Americans Grappled Honestly With Their History Would Any Monuments Be Left Standing . Foreign Policy . Archived from the original on August 18 2021 . Retrieved August 21 2021 . George Washington . Britannica.com . Encyclopdia Britannica Inc. July 4 2023. Archived from the original on September 2 2023 . Retrieved August 31 2023 . His fellow citizens memorialized him forever by naming the newly created capital city of the young nation for him while he was still alive. Later one of the states of union would bear his namethe only state named for an individual American. Moreover counties in 32 states were given his name and in time it also could be found in 121 postal addresses. Washington Monument . National Park Service . Archived from the original on March 22 2022 . Retrieved July 1 2023 . Mount Rushmore National Memorial . National Park Service . Archived from the original on June 12 2024 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . A Brief History of GW . GW Libraries . Archived from the original on September 14 2019 . Retrieved August 19 2019 . History and Traditions . Washington University in St. Louis . Archived from the original on April 8 2020 . Retrieved August 19 2019 . Commemorating George Washington . National Postal Museum . Smithsonian Institution . Archived from the original on August 30 2023 . Retrieved August 30 2023 . Bibliography For a selected list of published works treating Washington see Bibliography of George Washington . Book sources Adams Randolph Greenfield 1928. Arnold Benedict . In Johnson Allen ed.. Dictionary of American Biography . Scribner. Akers Charles W. 2002. John Adams . In Graff Henry ed.. The Presidents: A Reference History 3rd ed.. Scribner. pp. 2338. ISBN 978-0684312262 . Alden John R. 1996. George Washington: A Biography . Louisiana State University Press. ISBN 978-0807121269 . Anderson Fred 2007. Crucible of War: The Seven Years War and the Fate of Empire in British North America 17541766 . Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0307425393 . Avlon John 2017. Washingtons Farewell: The Founding Fathers Warning to Future Generations . Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-1476746463 . Banning Lance 1974. Woodward C. Vann ed.. Responses of the Presidents to Charges of Misconduct . Delacorte Press. ISBN 978-0440059233 . Bassett John Spencer 1906. The Federalist System 17891801 . Harper Brothers. Bell William Gardner 1992 1983. Commanding Generals and Chiefs of Staff 17752005: Portraits Biographical Sketches of the United States Armys Senior Officer . Center of Military History United States Army. ISBN 978-0160359125 . Boller Paul F. 1963. George Washington Religion . Southern Methodist University Press. Boorstin Daniel J. 2010. The Americans: The National Experience . Vintage Books. ISBN 978-0307756473 . Brumwell Stephen 2012. George Washington: Gentleman Warrior . Quercus Publishers. ISBN 978-1849165464 . Calloway Colin G. 2018. The Indian World of George Washington: The First President the First Americans and the Birth of the Nation . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0190652166 . Carlson Brady 2016. Dead Presidents: An American Adventure into the Strange Deaths and Surprising Afterlives of Our Nations Leaders . W.W. Norton Company. ISBN 978-0393243949 . Chernow Ron 2005. Alexander Hamilton . Penguin Press. ISBN 978-1-101-20085-8 . 2010. Washington: A Life . Penguin Press. ISBN 978-1594202667 . Coakley Robert W. 1996 1989. The Role of Federal Military Forces in Domestic Disorders 17891878 . Diane Publishing. pp. 4349. ISBN 978-0788128189 . Coe Alexis 2020. You Never Forget Your First: A Biography of George Washington . Viking Press. ISBN 978-0735224100 . Cooke Jacob E. 2002. George Washington . In Graff Henry ed.. The Presidents: A Reference History 3rd ed.. Scribner. pp. 121. ISBN 978-0684312262 . Craughwell Thomas J. 2009. Stealing Lincolns Body . Harvard University Press. pp. 7779. ISBN 978-0674024588 . Cresswell Julia ed. 2010. Oxford Dictionary of Word Origins . Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0199547937 . Cunliffe Marcus 1958. George Washington: Man and Monument . Little Brown. ISBN 978-0316164344 . Dalzell Robert F. Jr.; Dalzell Lee Baldwin 1998. George Washingtons Mount Vernon: At Home in Revolutionary America . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195121148 . Davis Burke 1975. George Washington and the American Revolution . Random House. ISBN 978-0394463889 . Elkins Stanley M. ; McKitrick Eric 1995 1993. The Age of Federalism . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195093810 . Ellis Joseph J. 2004. His Excellency: George Washington . Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-1400040315 . 2000. Founding Brothers: The Revolutionary Generation . Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0375705243 . Farner Thomas P. 1996. New Jersey in History: Fighting to Be Heard . Down the Shore Publishing. ISBN 978-0945582380 . Ferling John E. 1988. The First of Men: A Life of George Washington . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0199752751 . 2002. Setting the World Ablaze: Washington Adams Jefferson and the American Revolution . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195134094 . 2007. Almost a Miracle: The American Victory in the War of Independence . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0199758470 . 2009. The Ascent of George Washington: The Hidden Political Genius of an American Icon . Bloomsbury Press. ISBN 978-1608191826 . 2013. Jefferson and Hamilton: The Rivalry That Forged a Nation . Bloomsbury Press. ISBN 978-1608195428 . Fischer David Hackett 2004. Washingtons Crossing . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195170344 . Fishman Ethan M.; Pederson William D.; Rozell Mark J. 2001. George Washington: Foundation of Presidential Leadership and Character . Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0275968687 . Fitzpatrick John C. 1936. Washington George . In Malone Dumas ed.. Dictionary of American Biography . Vol. 19. Scribner. pp. 509527. Flexner James Thomas 1965. George Washington: the Forge of Experience 17321775 . Little Brown. ISBN 978-0316285971 . 1967. George Washington in the American Revolution 17751783 . Little Brown. 1969. George Washington and the New Nation 17831793 . Little Brown. ISBN 978-0316286008 . 1972. George Washington: Anguish and Farewell 17931799 . Little Brown. ISBN 978-0316286022 . 1974. Washington: The Indispensable Man . Little Brown. ISBN 978-0316286053 . 1991. The Traitor and the Spy: Benedict Arnold and John Andre . Syracuse University Press. ISBN 978-0815602637 . Frazer Gregg L. 2012. The Religious Beliefs of Americas Founders Reason Revelation and Revolution . University Press of Kansas. ISBN 978-0700618453 . Ford Worthington Chauncey ; Hunt Gaillard; Fitzpatrick John Clement 1904. Journals of the Continental Congress 17741789: 1774 . Vol. 1. U.S. Government Printing Office. Freedman Russell 2008. Washington at Valley Forge . Holiday House. ISBN 978-0823420698 . Freeman Douglas Southall 1968. Harwell Richard Barksdale ed.. Washington . Scribner. 1952. George Washington: Victory with the help of France Volume 5 . Eyre and Spottiswoode. Gaff Alan D. 2004. Bayonets in the Wilderness: Anthony Waynes Legion in the Old Northwest . University of Oklahoma Press. ISBN 978-0806135854 . Genovese Michael A. 2009. Kazin Michael ed.. The Princeton Encyclopedia of American Political History Vols. I II . Princeton University Press. ISBN 978-1400833566 . Gregg Gary L. ; Spalding Matthew eds. 1999. Patriot Sage: George Washington and the American Political Tradition . ISI Books. ISBN 978-1882926381 . Grizzard Frank E. Jr. 2002. George Washington: A Biographical Companion . ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-1576070826 . 2005. George!: A Guide to All Things Washington . Mariner Pub. ISBN 978-0976823889 . Hayes Kevin J. 2017. George Washington A Life in Books . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0190456672 . Henderson Donald 2009. Smallpox: The Death of a Disease . Prometheus Books. ISBN 978-1591027225 . Henriques Peter R. 2006. Realistic Visionary: A Portrait of George Washington . University Press of Virginia. ISBN 978-0813927411 . 2020. First and Always: A New Portrait of George Washington . Charlottesville VA: University of Virginia Press. ISBN 978-0813944807 . Higginbotham Don 2001. George Washington Reconsidered . University Press of Virginia. ISBN 978-0813920054 . Hindle Brooke 2017 1964. David Rittenhouse . Princeton University Press. p. 92. ISBN 978-1400886784 . Hirschfeld Fritz 1997. George Washington and Slavery: A Documentary Portrayal . University of Missouri Press. ISBN 978-0826211354 . Isaacson Walter 2003. Benjamin Franklin an American Life . Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-0743260848 . Irving Washington 1857. The Life of George Washington Vol. 5 . G. P. Putnam and Son. Jensen Merrill 1948. The Articles of Confederation: An Interpretation of the Social-Constitutional History of the American Revolution 17741781 . University of Wisconsin Press. Jillson Calvin C.; Wilson Rick K. 1994. Congressional Dynamics: Structure Coordination and Choice in the First American Congress 17741789 . Stanford University Press. ISBN 978-0804722933 . Johnstone William 1919. George Washington The Christian . The Abingdon Press. Ketchum Richard M. 1999 1973. The Winter Soldiers: The Battles for Trenton and Princeton . Henry Holt. ISBN 978-0805060980 . 1975. Eagle and Sword: The Federalists and the Creation of the Military Establishment in America 17831802 . Free Press. pp. 225242. ISBN 978-0029175514 . Lancaster Bruce; Plumb John H. 1985. The American Revolution . American Heritage Press. ISBN 978-0828102810 . Lear Tobias 1799. Tobias Lear to William Augustine Washington . In Ford Worthington Chauncey ed.. The Writings of George Washington . Vol. 14. G. Putnam Sons published 1893. pp. 257258. Lengel Edward G. 2005. General George Washington: A Military Life . Random House. ISBN 978-1-4000-6081-8 . Levy Philip 2013. Where the Cherry Tree Grew: The Story of Ferry Farm George Washingtons Boyhood Home . Macmillan. ISBN 978-1250023148 . Lightner Otto C.; Reeder Pearl Ann eds. 1953. Hobbies Volume 58 . Lightner Publishing Company. p. 133. Mann Barbara Alice 2008. George Washingtons War on Native America . University of Nevada Press. ISBN 978-0803216358 . Archived from the original on July 25 2023 . Retrieved July 9 2023 . McCullough David 2005. 1776 . Simon Schuster. ISBN 978-0743226714 . Middlekauff Robert 2015. Washingtons Revolution: The Making of Americas First Leader . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. ISBN 978-1101874240 . Morrison Jeffery H. 2009. The Political Philosophy of George Washington . JHU Press. ISBN 978-0801891090 . Nagy John A. 2016. George Washingtons Secret Spy War: The Making of Americas First Spymaster . St. Martins Press. ISBN 978-1250096821 . Novak Michael ; Novak Jana 2007. Washingtons God: Religion Liberty and The Father of Our Country . Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-05126-7 . Nowlan Robert A. 2014. The American Presidents Washington to Tyler What They Did What They Said What Was Said About Them with Full Source Notes . McFarland. ISBN 978-1476601182 . Palmer Dave Richard 2010. George Washington and Benedict Arnold: A Tale of Two Patriots . Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-1596981645 . Parry Jay A. ; Allison Andrew M. 1991. The Real George Washington: The True Story of Americas Most Indispensable Man . National Center for Constitutional Studies. ISBN 978-0880800136 . Parsons Eugene 1898. George Washington: A Character Sketch . H. G. Campbell publishing Company. Philbrick Nathaniel 2016. Valiant Ambition: George Washington Benedict Arnold and the Fate of the American Revolution . Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0143110194 . Puls Mark 2008. Henry Knox: Visionary General of the American Revolution . St. Martins Press. ISBN 978-0230611429 . Randall Willard Sterne 1997. George Washington: A Life . Henry Holt Co. ISBN 978-0805027792 . Randall Willard Sterne 1990. Benedict Arnold: Patriot and Traitor . New York : Barnes Noble. ISBN 978-0-7607-1272-6 . Rasmussen William M. S.; Tilton Robert S. 1999. George Washington: The Man Behind the Myths . University Press of Virginia. ISBN 978-0813919003 . Rose Alexander 2006. Washingtons Spies: The Story of Americas First Spy Ring . Random House Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0553804218 . Schwarz Philip J. ed. 2001. Slavery at the home of George Washington . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. ISBN 978-0931917387 . Spalding Matthew; Garrity Patrick J. 1996. A Sacred Union of Citizens: George Washingtons Farewell Address and the American Character . Lanham Boulder New York London: Rowman Littlefield Publishers Inc. ISBN 978-0847682621 . Sparks Jared 1839. The Life of George Washington . F. Andrews. Sobel Robert 1968. Panic on Wall Street: A History of Americas Financial Disasters . Beard Books. ISBN 978-1-8931-2246-8 . Smith Justin H 1907. Our Struggle for the Fourteenth Colony vol 1 . New York: G.P. Putnams Sons. Smith Justin H. 1907. Our Struggle for the Fourteenth Colony vol 2 . New York: G.P. Putnams Sons. Stavish Mark 2007. Freemasonry: Rituals Symbols History of the Secret Society . Llewellyn Publications. ISBN 978-0738711485 . Strickland William 1840. The Tomb of Washington at Mount Vernon . Carey Hart. Subak Susan 2018. The Five-Ton Life . Our Sustainable Future. University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0803296886 . Taylor Alan 2016. American Revolutions: A Continental History 17501804 . W.W. Norton Company. ISBN 978-0393354768 . Thompson Mary 2008. In The Hands of a Good Providence . University Press of Virginia. p. 40. ISBN 978-0813927633 . Archived from the original on July 6 2022 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Twohig Dorothy 2001. That Species of Property : Washingtons Role in the Controversy over Slavery . In Higginbotham Don ed.. George Washington Reconsidered . University Press of Virginia. pp. 114138. ISBN 978-0813920054 . Archived from the original on November 19 2019 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Unger Harlow Giles 2013. Mr. President : George Washington and the Making of the Nations Highest Office . Da Capo Press A Member of the Perseus Book Group. ISBN 978-0306822414 . Van Doren Carl 1941. Secret History of the American Revolution: An Account of the Conspiracies of Benedict Arnold and Numerous Others Drawn from the Secret Service . Garden City Pub. Co. Waldman Carl; Braun Molly 2009. Atlas of the North American Indian 3 ed.. Facts On File Inc. ISBN 978-0816068593 . Washington George 1888. Joseph M. Toner ed.. Washingtons Rules of Civility and Decent Behaviour in Company and Conversation . Washington D.C.: W. H. Morrison. Weems Mason Locke 1918. A History of the Life and Death Virtues and Exploits of General George Washington with Curious Anecdotes Equally Honourable to Himself and Exemplary to His Young Countrymen . J.B. Lippincott. Wiencek Henry 2003. An Imperfect God: George Washington His Slaves and the Creation of America . Farrar Straus and Giroux. ISBN 978-0374175269 . Willcox William B.; Arnstein Walter L. 1988. The Age of Aristocracy 1688 to 1830 Fifth ed.. D.C. Heath and Company. ISBN 978-0669134230 . Wood Gordon S. 1992. The Radicalism of the American Revolution . Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0679404934 . 2001. Higginbotham Don ed.. George Washington Reconsidered . University Press of Virginia. ISBN 978-0813920054 . Wulf Andrea 2012. Founding Gardeners: The Revolutionary Generation Nature and the Shaping of the American Nation . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0307390684 . Miscellaneous Cheatham Michael L. 2008. The Death of George Washington: An End to the Controversy? . American Surgery . 74 8: 770774. doi : 10.1177000313480807400821 . PMID 18705585 . S2CID 31457820 . Estes Todd 2000. Shaping the Politics of Public Opinion: Federalists and the Jay Treaty Debate . Journal of the Early Republic . 20 3: 393422. doi : 10.23073125063 . JSTOR 3125063 . 2001. The Art of Presidential Leadership: George Washington and the Jay Treaty . The Virginia Magazine of History and Biography . 109 2: 127158. JSTOR 4249911 . Furstenberg Francois 2011. Atlantic Slavery Atlantic Freedom: George Washington Slavery and Transatlantic Abolitionist Networks . The William and Mary Quarterly . 68 2. Omohundro Institute of Early American History and Culture: 247286. doi : 10.5309willmaryquar.68.2.0247 . JSTOR 10.5309willmaryquar.68.2.0247 . Immekus Alexander 2018. Freemasonry . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on October 2 2020 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Kohn Richard H. 1970. The Inside History of the Newburgh Conspiracy: America and the Coup dEtat . The William and Mary Quarterly . 27 2: 187220. doi : 10.23071918650 . JSTOR 1918650 . 1972. The Washington Administrations Decision to Crush the Whiskey Rebellion PDF . The Journal of American History . 59 3: 567584. doi : 10.23071900658 . JSTOR 1900658 . Archived from the original PDF on September 24 2015. Lurie Shira 2018. George Washingtons Farewell Address . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on March 20 2019. Religion and the Founding of the American Republic . Library of Congress. 2011. Archived from the original on November 18 2019 . Retrieved July 20 2018 . Morens David M. 1999. Death of a President . New England Journal of Medicine . 341 24: 18451849. doi : 10.1056NEJM199912093412413 . PMID 10588974 . Morgan Kenneth 2000. George Washington and the Problem of Slavery . Journal of American Studies . 34 2: 279301. doi : 10.1017S0021875899006398 . JSTOR 27556810 . S2CID 145717616 . Morgan Philip D. 2005. To Get Quit of Negroes : George Washington and Slavery . Journal of American Studies . 39 3. Cambridge University Press: 403429. doi : 10.1017S0021875805000599 . JSTOR 27557691 . S2CID 145143979 . Surveying . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on April 21 2018 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Tsakiridis George 2018. George Washington and Religion . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on October 10 2020 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Newton R.S.; Freeman Z.; Bickley G. eds. 1858. Heroic TreatmentIllness and Death of George Washington . The Eclectic Medical Journal . 1717 : 273. Vadakan Vibul V. WinterSpring 2005. A Physician Looks At The Death of Washington . The Early America Review . 6 1. ISSN 1090-4247 . Archived from the original on December 16 2005. Wallenborn White McKenzie 1999. George Washingtons Terminal Illness: A Modern Medical Analysis of the Last Illness and Death of George Washington . The Papers of George Washington . University of Virginia. Archived from the original on July 22 2020 . Retrieved July 20 2018 . Where the Cherry Tree Grew: An Interview with Phillip Levy . George Washingtons Mount Vernon . Mount Vernon Ladies Association. Archived from the original on November 6 2018 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Urwin Gregory J. W. October 19 2021. The Yorktown Tragedy: Washingtons Slave Roundup . The Journal of the American Revolution . Archived from the original on March 20 2022 . Retrieved June 13 2024 . Further reading Library resources about George Washington Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Curtis Wayne May 1 2006. The Father of the Pina Colada? . The Atlantic . Cohen Andrew November 1 2011. What George Washington Thought About the Constitution . The Atlantic . Lewis Danny September 22 2016. George Washingtons Biracial Family Is Getting New Recognition . Smithsonian . Good Cassandra September 28 2018. Did George Washington Have a Couple of Things in His Past? . The Atlantic . Zegart Amy November 25 2018. George Washington Was a Master of Deception . The Atlantic . Wulf Karin April 7 2020. The Presidents Cabinet Was an Invention of Americas First President . Smithsonian . Coe Alexis February 12 2020. George Washington Saw a Future for America: Mules . Smithsonian . Immerwahr Daniel January 31 2023. Did George Washington Burn New York? . The Atlantic . External links Listen to this article 1 hour and 51 minutes This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 2 March 2019 2019-03-02 and does not reflect subsequent edits. Audio help More spoken articles George Washingtons Mount Vernon The Papers of George Washington subset of Founders Online from the National Archives Works by George Washington at Project Gutenberg Works by George Washington at Biodiversity Heritage Library In Our Time: Washington the American Revolution BBC Radio 4 discussion with Carol Berkin Simon Middleton Colin Bonwick June 24 2004 Great Lives: George Washington BBC Radio 4 discussion with Matthew Parris Michael Rose Frank Grizzard October 21 2016 George Washington on C-SPAN Scholarly coverage of Washington at the Miller Center University of Virginia v t e George Washington 1st President of the United States 17891797 Senior Officer of the Army 17981799 Commander-in-Chief of the Continental Army 17751783 Delegate to the Second Continental Congress 1775 Delegate to the First Continental Congress 1774 Military career Revolutionary War Military career French and Indian War Jumonville Glen Battle of Fort Necessity Battle of the Monongahela Forbes Expedition Washington in the American Revolution Commander-in-chief Continental Army Aides-de-camp Washingtons headquarters office and sleeping tent Boston campaign Siege of Boston New York and New Jersey campaign Delaware River crossing Battle of Trenton Battle of the Assunpink Creek Battle of Princeton Philadelphia campaign Battle of Brandywine Battle of Germantown Battle of White Marsh Valley Forge Battle of Monmouth Battles of Saratoga Sullivan Expedition Yorktown campaign Siege of Yorktown Culper Spy Ring Newburgh Conspiracy Newburgh letter Asgill Affair Evacuation Day Resignation as commander-in-chief Badge of Military Merit Purple Heart Washington Before Boston Medal Horses Nelson Blueskin Other U.S. founding events Initiated co-wrote 1769 Virginia Association Initiated 1774 Fairfax Resolves Continental Association Court of Appeals in Cases of Capture 1785 Mount Vernon Conference Chairman 1787 Constitutional Convention George Washingtons political evolution Presidency timeline 178889 United States presidential election First inauguration inaugural bible 1792 presidential election Second inauguration Reception at Trenton Title of Mr. President Cabinet of the United States Secretary of State Attorney General Secretary of the Treasury Secretary of War Judiciary Act of 1789 Oath Administration Act Nonintercourse Act Whiskey Rebellion Militia Acts of 1792 Coinage Act of 1792 United States Mint Presidential Succession Act of 1792 United States Capitol cornerstone laying Proclamation of Neutrality Neutrality Act of 1794 Jay Treaty Pinckneys Treaty Slave Trade Act of 1794 Residence Act Thanksgiving Proclamation Farewell Address State of the Union Address 1790 1791 1792 1793 1796 Cabinet Federal judicial appointments John Rutledge Supreme Court nominations Views and public image Presidential library The Washington Papers Religious views Washington and slavery Town Destroyer Legacy Life and homes Early life Birthplace Ferry Farm boyhood home Mount Vernon Fishery Gristmill Whiskey distillery Woodlawn Plantation Longfellow HouseWashingtons Headquarters National Historic Site Ford Mansion Washingtons headquarters Hasbrouck House First Presidential Mansion Second Presidential Mansion Presidents House Philadelphia Germantown White House Custis estate Washingtons relations with the Iroquois Confederacy Potomac Company James River and Kanawha Canal Mountain Road Lottery Congressional Gold Medal Thanks of Congress President General of the Society of the Cincinnati Washington College Washington and Lee University Electoral history of George Washington Post-presidency of George Washington Memorials and depictions Washington D.C. Washington state Washington Monument Mount Rushmore Washingtons Birthday Purple Heart The Apotheosis of Washington Washington Monument Boonsboro Maryland Washington Monument Baltimore George Washington Houdon plaster copy George Washington Ceracchi George Washington Canova George Washington Greenough George Washington Trumbull George Washington and the Revolutionary War Door Revolutionary War Door Washington Crossing the Delaware The Passage of the Delaware General George Washington at Trenton Washington at Verplancks Point General George Washington Resigning His Commission Surrender of Lord Cornwallis Unfinished portrait Lansdowne portrait The Washington Family portrait Washington at Princeton paintings George Washington Taking the Salute at Trenton Reception at Trenton painting Statues Trenton Battle Monument Princeton Battle Monument Point of View sculpture George Washington on Horseback Austin statue Baltimore statue Boston statue Mexico City statue Morristown statue Newark statue New York City statue Wall Street statue Paris statue Perth Amboy statue Philadelphia statue Portland statue Washington D.C. statue West Point monument George Washington University Washington University in St. Louis Washington Masonic National Memorial George Washington Memorial Parkway George Washington Bridge Washington and Jefferson National Forests Washington Square Park Arch U.S. Postage stamps WashingtonFranklin Issues 1932 bicentennial Currency Washington quarter 50 State Quarters D.C. and territories quarters America the Beautiful quarters American Women quarters Washington dollar Lafayette dollar Silver bullion coins Washington nickel Washington half eagle 250th Anniversary half dollar Mount Rushmore Anniversary coins Mount Washington Cultural depictions George Washington 1984 miniseries 1986 sequel A More Perfect Union 1989 film The Crossing 2000 film We Fight to Be Free 2006 film Turn: Washingtons Spies 20142017 series The War that Made America 2006 miniseries Washington 2020 miniseries Hamilton film Related Bibliography List of articles Founders Online Founding Fathers of the United States Republicanism Federalist Party Federalist Era Virginia dynasty Coat of arms Cherry-tree anecdote River Farm Washingtons Crossing WashingtonRochambeau Revolutionary Route 1751 Barbados trip Category Syng inkstand General of the Armies Conway Cabal American Foxhound American Philosophical Society American Revolution patriots Betsy Ross flag Mount Vernon Ladies Association Mount Vernon replicas George Washington Memorial Building Attempted theft of Washingtons skull Family Martha Washington wife John Parke Custis stepson George Washington Parke Custis step-grandson adopted son Eleanor Parke Custis step-granddaughter adopted daughter Augustine Washington father Mary Ball Washington mother Lawrence Washington half-brother Augustine Washington Jr. half-brother Elizabeth Washington Lewis sister Samuel Washington brother John A. Washington brother Charles Washington brother Lawrence Washington grandfather Mildred Gale grandmother John Washington great-grandfather George Reade 2nd great-grandfather Bushrod Washington nephew Slaves List Betty Caroline Branham William Costin Sarah Johnson Oney Judge William Lee Hercules Posey Christopher Sheels Deborah Squash Harry Washington John Adams Category Offices and distinctions Military offices Office established Commander in Chief of the Continental Army 17751783 Succeeded by Henry Knox as Senior Officer Preceded by James Wilkinson Senior Officer of the United States Army 17981799 Succeeded by Alexander Hamilton Political offices Preceded by Hugh West Member of the Virginia House of Burgesses 17581775 Office abolished Office established Delegate from Virginia to the Continental Congress 17741775 Succeeded by Thomas Jefferson President of the United States 17891797 Succeeded by John Adams Academic offices Preceded by Richard Terrick 1776 Chancellor of the College of William Mary 17881799 Succeeded by John Tyler 1859 Links to related articles v t e Presidents of the United States Presidents and presidencies George Washington 17891797 John Adams 17971801 Thomas Jefferson 18011809 James Madison 18091817 James Monroe 18171825 John Quincy Adams 18251829 Andrew Jackson 18291837 Martin Van Buren 18371841 William Henry Harrison 1841 John Tyler 18411845 James K. Polk 18451849 Zachary Taylor 18491850 Millard Fillmore 18501853 Franklin Pierce 18531857 James Buchanan 18571861 Abraham Lincoln 18611865 Andrew Johnson 18651869 Ulysses S. Grant 18691877 Rutherford B. Hayes 18771881 James A. Garfield 1881 Chester A. Arthur 18811885 Grover Cleveland 18851889 Benjamin Harrison 18891893 Grover Cleveland 18931897 William McKinley 18971901 Theodore Roosevelt 19011909 William Howard Taft 19091913 Woodrow Wilson 19131921 Warren G. Harding 19211923 Calvin Coolidge 19231929 Herbert Hoover 19291933 Franklin D. Roosevelt 19331945 Harry S. Truman 19451953 Dwight D. Eisenhower 19531961 John F. Kennedy 19611963 Lyndon B. Johnson 19631969 Richard Nixon 19691974 Gerald Ford 19741977 Jimmy Carter 19771981 Ronald Reagan 19811989 George H. W. Bush 19891993 Bill Clinton 19932001 George W. Bush 20012009 Barack Obama 20092017 Donald Trump 20172021 Joe Biden 2021present Presidency timelines Washington McKinley T. Roosevelt Taft Wilson Harding Coolidge Hoover F. D. Roosevelt Truman Eisenhower Kennedy L. B. Johnson Nixon Ford Carter Reagan G. H. W. Bush Clinton G. W. Bush Obama Trump Biden Category List v t e Continental Association Signatories President of Congress Peyton Randolph New Hampshire John Sullivan Nathaniel Folsom Massachusetts Bay Thomas Cushing Samuel Adams John Adams Robert Treat Paine Rhode Island Stephen Hopkins Samuel Ward Connecticut Eliphalet Dyer Roger Sherman Silas Deane New York Isaac Low John Alsop John Jay James Duane Philip Livingston William Floyd Henry Wisner Simon Boerum New Jersey James Kinsey William Livingston Stephen Crane Richard Smith John De Hart Pennsylvania Joseph Galloway John Dickinson Charles Humphreys Thomas Mifflin Edward Biddle John Morton George Ross The Lower Counties Caesar Rodney Thomas McKean George Read Maryland Matthew Tilghman Thomas Johnson Junr William Paca Samuel Chase Virginia Richard Henry Lee George Washington Patrick Henry Junr Richard Bland Benjamin Harrison Edmund Pendleton North Carolina William Hooper Joseph Hewes Richard Caswell South Carolina Henry Middleton Thomas Lynch Christopher Gadsden John Rutledge Edward Rutledge Related Virginia Association Fairfax Resolves Suffolk Resolves First Continental Congress Declaration and Resolves of the First Continental Congress Charles Thomson Journals of the Continental Congress Carpenters Hall Display National Archives Rotunda for the Charters of Freedom v t e Constitution of the United States Articles Preamble I II III IV V VI VII Amendments Bill of Rights 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 17951804 11 12 Reconstruction 13 14 15 20th century 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 Unratified Congressional Apportionment Titles of Nobility Corwin Amendment Child Labor Equal Rights District of Columbia Voting Rights Proposed Balanced budget Blaine amendment Bricker amendment Campaign finance reform Christian amendment Crittenden Compromise Electoral College abolition Equal Opportunity to Govern Federal Marriage Flag Desecration Human Life Liberty amendment Ludlow amendment Parental Rights amendment School Prayer Single subject Victims Rights Convention to propose amendments State ratifying conventions Formation History Articles of Confederation Mount Vernon Conference Annapolis Convention Philadelphia Convention Virginia Plan New Jersey Plan Connecticut Compromise Three-fifths Compromise Committee of Detail List of Framers Signing Printing Independence Hall Syng inkstand The Federalist Papers Anti-Federalist Papers Massachusetts Compromise Virginia Ratifying Convention New York Circular Letter Hillsborough Convention Fayetteville Convention Rhode Island ratification Drafting and ratification timeline Clauses Admission to the Union Appointments Appropriations Assemble and Petition Clause Assistance of Counsel Case or Controversy Citizenship Commerce Compact Compulsory Process Confrontation Congressional enforcement Contingent Elections Contract Copyright and Patent Double Jeopardy Due Process Elections Engagements Equal Protection Establishment Exceptions Excessive Bail Ex Post Facto Extradition Free Exercise Freedom of the Press Freedom of Speech Fugitive Slave Full Faith and Credit General Welfare Guarantee House Apportionment Impeachment Import-Export Ineligibility Militia Natural-born citizen Necessary and Proper No Religious Test Oath or Affirmation Original Jurisdiction Origination Pardon Postal Presentment Presidential Electors Presidential succession Privileges and Immunities Privileges or Immunities Recess appointment Recommendation Self-Incrimination Speech or Debate Speedy Trial State of the Union Supremacy Suspension Take Care Takings Taxing and Spending Territorial Title of Nobility Foreign Emoluments Treaty Trial by Jury Vesting Legislative Executive Judicial Vicinage War Powers Interpretation Balance of powers Concurrent powers Constitutional law Criminal procedure Criminal sentencing Dormant Commerce Clause Enumerated powers Equal footing Executive privilege Implied powers Incorporation of the Bill of Rights Judicial review Nondelegation doctrine Plenary power Preemption Reserved powers Saxbe fix Separation of church and state Separation of powers Symmetric federalism Taxation power Unitary executive theory Signatories Convention President George Washington New Hampshire John Langdon Nicholas Gilman Massachusetts Nathaniel Gorham Rufus King Connecticut William Samuel Johnson Roger Sherman New York Alexander Hamilton New Jersey William Livingston David Brearley William Paterson Jonathan Dayton Pennsylvania Benjamin Franklin Thomas Mifflin Robert Morris George Clymer Thomas Fitzsimons Jared Ingersoll James Wilson Gouverneur Morris Delaware George Read Gunning Bedford Jr. John Dickinson Richard Bassett Jacob Broom Maryland James McHenry Daniel of St. Thomas Jenifer Daniel Carroll Virginia John Blair James Madison North Carolina William Blount Richard Dobbs Spaight Hugh Williamson South Carolina John Rutledge Charles Cotesworth Pinckney Charles Pinckney Pierce Butler Georgia William Few Abraham Baldwin Convention Secretary William Jackson Related Notes of Debates in the Federal Convention of 1787 Jacob Shallus Bibliography of the United States Constitution Display and legacy National Archives Rotunda for the Charters of Freedom Independence Mall Constitution Day and Citizenship Day Constitution Gardens Constitution Week National Constitution Center Scene at the Signing of the Constitution painting A More Perfect Union film Worldwide influence v t e Leaders of the United States Army Senior Officer Commanding General Washington Knox Doughty Harmar St. Clair Wayne Hamilton Wilkinson Dearborn J. Brown Macomb W. Scott McClellan Halleck Grant Sherman Sheridan Schofield Miles Chiefs of Staff Young Chaffee Bates Bell Wood Wotherspoon H. Scott Bliss March Pershing Hines Summerall MacArthur Craig Marshall Eisenhower Bradley Collins Ridgway Taylor Lemnitzer Decker Wheeler Johnson Westmoreland B. Palmer Abrams Weyand Rogers Meyer Wickham Vuono Sullivan Reimer Shinseki Schoomaker Casey Dempsey Odierno Milley McConville George Vice Chiefs of Staff Collins Haislip Hull Bolte W. Palmer Lemnitzer Decker Eddleman Hamlett Abrams Haines B. Palmer Haig Weyand Kerwin Kroesen Vessey Wickham Thurman A. Brown RisCassi Sullivan Reimer Peay Tilelli Griffith Crouch Shinseki Keane Casey Cody Chiarelli Austin Campbell Allyn McConville Martin George Mingus v t e American Revolutionary War Origins of the American Revolution Philosophy American Enlightenment John Locke Colonial history Liberalism Republicanism Freedom of religion Rights of Englishmen No taxation without representation Common Sense Spirit of 76 All men are created equal Life Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness Consent of the governed Expansionism Settler colonialism Royalists PittNewcastle ministry Bute ministry Grenville ministry First Rockingham ministry Chatham ministry Grafton ministry North ministry Second Rockingham ministry Shelburne ministry FoxNorth coalition Loyalists Black Loyalist Related British Acts of Parliament Navigation Iron Molasses Royal Proclamation of 1763 Sugar Currency Quartering Stamp up i.p.o Declaratory Townshend Tea Quebec Intolerable Conciliatory Resolution Restraining Proclamation of Rebellion Prohibitory Colonials Loyal Nine Stamp Act Congress Declaration of Rights and Grievances Virginia Association Daughters of Liberty Sons of Liberty Patriots Black Patriots Committees of correspondence Committees of safety Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania Massachusetts Circular Letter Suffolk Resolves First Continental Congress Continental Association Minutemen Provincial Congress Second Continental Congress United Colonies Olive Branch Petition Declaration of the Causes and Necessity of Taking Up Arms Committee of Secret Correspondence Halifax Resolves Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence Model Treaty Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union Confederation Congress Events French and Indian War Treaty of Paris 1763 Boston Massacre British credit crisis of 17721773 Gaspee affair Hutchinson letters affair Boston Tea Party Philadelphia Tea Party Powder Alarm Combatants Campaigns Theaters Battles Events Colonies Combatants United Colonies Thirteen Colonies Continental Congress Army Navy Marines Kingdom of Great Britain Parliament British Army Royal Navy European allies of King George III Colonial allies France Franco-American Treaty Army Navy Hortalez et Cie German supporters of Congress Campaigns and theaters Boston Quebec Nova Scotia New York and New Jersey Saratoga Philadelphia Northern Northern after Saratoga Southern Western Yorktown Naval battles Major battles Lexington and Concord Boston Capture of Fort Ticonderoga Bunker Hill Quebec Valcour Island Long Island Harlem Heights Fort Washington Trenton Assunpink Creek Princeton Siege of Fort Ticonderoga Bennington Saratoga Brandywine Germantown Monmouth St. Lucia Grenada Stony Point Sullivan Expedition Savannah Gibraltar Cape St. Vincent Charleston Connecticut Farms Springfield Camden Kings Mountain Cowpens Pensacola Guilford Court House Lochrys Defeat Chesapeake Yorktown The Saintes Other events Staten Island Peace Conference First Salute Washingtons crossing of the Delaware River Conway Cabal Valley Forge Entry of France into war Carlisle Peace Commission Gordon Riots Pennsylvania Mutiny of 1781 Sint Eustatius Newburgh Conspiracy Pennsylvania Mutiny of 1783 Related conflicts CherokeeAmerican wars Fourth Anglo-Dutch War Second Anglo-Mysore War Involvement by colony or location Rebel colonies Connecticut Delaware Georgia Maryland Massachusetts New Hampshire New Jersey New York North Carolina Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina Virginia Loyal colonies East Florida Nova Scotia Quebec West Florida Leaders British Military Arbuthnot Brant Burgoyne Campbell Carleton Clinton Cornwallis Fraser Gage Graves Richard Howe William Howe Knyphausen Rodney Civilian King George III Amherst Barrington Germain North Rockingham Sandwich Shelburne Colonial Military Washington Alexander Allen Arnold Barry Claghorn Clark Duportail Gates Greene Hamilton Hopkins Jones de Kalb Knox Lafayette Charles Lee Lincoln Mercer Montgomery Nicholson Putnam Rodney St. Clair Schuyler von Steuben Sullivan Ward Wayne Civilian John Adams Samuel Adams Carroll Dickinson Franklin Hancock Hanson Henry Huntington Jay Jefferson Laurens Richard Henry Lee McKean Morris Revere Rush Witherspoon Colonial allies French Louis XVI Beaumarchais dEstaing de Grasse de Guichen Luzerne de Rochambeau Suffren Vergennes Aftermath Society of the Cincinnati Treaty of Paris 1783 Evacuation Day 1783 Ratification Day 1784 Constitutional Convention The Federalist Papers Constitution Bill of Rights Shayss Rebellion Jay Treaty Related topics Military Prisoners The Turtle Political Founding Fathers Diplomacy Liberty Tree Yankee Doodle Other topics Timeline of the American Revolution African Americans in the Revolutionary War Dogs in the American Revolutionary War Intelligence in the American Revolutionary War Women in the American Revolution Financial costs of the war Continental currency banknotes Continental Currency dollar coin Libertas Americana Commemoration film television theater Independence Day Patriots Day Pulaski Memorial Day Washingtons Birthday Jeffersons Birthday Von Steuben Day Minor holidays Centennial Sesquicentennial Bicentennial Semiquincentennial Children of the American Revolution Daughters of the American Revolution Sons of the American Revolution Sons of the Revolution Charters of Freedom Rotunda Museum of the American Revolution v t e Washington family First generation Lawrence Washington 16021652 Coat of arms of the Washington family Second generation John Washington Third generation Lawrence Washington 16591698 Fourth generation Augustine Washington Bailey Washington Fifth generation Lawrence Washington 17181752 Augustine Washington Jr. George Washington Elizabeth Washington Lewis Samuel Washington John Augustine Washington Charles Washington Henry Washington William Washington Bailey Washington Jr. Lund Washington Sixth generation William Augustine Washington Bushrod Washington George Steptoe Washington Lawrence Augustine Washington George William Washington Seventh generation John Thornton Augustine Washington George Corbin Washington Bushrod C. Washington Peter Grayson Washington Eighth generation Lawrence Berry Washington Lewis Washington Benjamin Franklin Washington William D. Washington Eugenia Washington Tenth generation W. Selden Washington Washington family residences Abingdon Arlington House Beall-Air Blakeley Cedar Lawn Claymont Court Fairfield Ferry Farm George Washington Birthplace National Monument Happy Retreat Harewood Kenmore Mary Washington House Mount Vernon Richwood Hall Ridgedale Rising Sun Tavern River Farm Sulgrave Washington Old Hall v t e Cabinet of President George Washington 17891797 Secretary of State John Jay 17891790 Thomas Jefferson 17901793 Edmund Randolph 17941795 Timothy Pickering 17951797 Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton 17891795 Oliver Wolcott Jr. 17951797 Secretary of War Henry Knox 17891794 Timothy Pickering 1795 James McHenry 17961797 Attorney General Edmund Randolph 17891794 William Bradford 17941795 Charles Lee 17951797 v t e Washington and Lee University Academics The College Williams School of Commerce Economics and Politics School of Law Student life Lexington Triad Omicron Delta Kappa Cadaver Society Sigma Society Washington and Lee Mock Convention Washington and Lee Generals Old Dominion Athletic Conference Washington and Lee Swing Media Shenandoah WLUR Lee Family Digital Archive Washington and Lee Law Review German Law Journal People George Washington Robert E. Lee University presidents Alumni and faculty Campus Colonnade University Chapel Liberty Hall Site Sydney Lewis Hall Commons Category v t e Chancellors of the College of William Mary Henry Compton 16931700 Thomas Tenison 17001707 Henry Compton 17071713 John Robinson 17141721 William Wake 17211729 Edmund Gibson 17291736 William Wake 17361737 Edmund Gibson 17371748 Thomas Sherlock 17491761 Thomas Hayter 1762 Charles Wyndham 17621763 Philip Yorke 1764 Richard Terrick 17641776 George Washington 17881799 Vacant 18001858 John Tyler 18591862 Vacant 18631870 Hugh Blair Grigsby 18711881 Vacant 18821941 John Stewart Bryan 19421944 Vacant 1945 Colgate Darden 19461947 Vacant 19481961 Alvin Duke Chandler 19621974 Vacant 19751985 Warren E. Burger 19861993 Margaret Thatcher 19932000 Henry Kissinger 20002005 Sandra Day OConnor 20052012 Robert Gates 2012 v t e Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees John Adams John Quincy Adams Jane Addams Louis Agassiz Susan B. Anthony John James Audubon George Bancroft Clara Barton Henry Ward Beecher Alexander Graham Bell Daniel Boone Edwin Booth Louis Brandeis Phillips Brooks William Cullen Bryant Luther Burbank Andrew Carnegie George Washington Carver William Ellery Channing Rufus Choate Henry Clay Grover Cleveland James Fenimore Cooper Peter Cooper Charlotte Cushman James Buchanan Eads Thomas Alva Edison Jonathan Edwards Ralph Waldo Emerson David Farragut Stephen Foster Benjamin Franklin Robert Fulton Josiah W. Gibbs William C. Gorgas Ulysses S. Grant Asa Gray Alexander Hamilton Nathaniel Hawthorne Joseph Henry Patrick Henry Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. Mark Hopkins Elias Howe Washington Irving Andrew Jackson Thomas J. Jackson Thomas Jefferson John Paul Jones James Kent Sidney Lanier Robert E. Lee Abraham Lincoln Henry Wadsworth Longfellow James Russell Lowell Mary Lyon Edward MacDowell James Madison Horace Mann John Marshall Matthew Fontaine Maury Albert A. Michelson Maria Mitchell James Monroe Samuel F. B. Morse William T. G. Morton John Lothrop Motley Simon Newcomb Thomas Paine Alice Freeman Palmer Francis Parkman George Peabody William Penn Edgar Allan Poe Walter Reed Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Augustus Saint-Gaudens William Tecumseh Sherman John Philip Sousa Joseph Story Harriet Beecher Stowe Gilbert Stuart Sylvanus Thayer Henry David Thoreau Mark Twain Lillian Wald Booker T. Washington George Washington Daniel Webster George Westinghouse James McNeill Whistler Walt Whitman Eli Whitney John Greenleaf Whittier Emma Willard Frances Willard Roger Williams Woodrow Wilson Orville Wright Wilbur Wright v t e Mount Rushmore Shrine of Democracy Construction Gutzon Borglum sculptor Lincoln Borglum assistant sculptor Luigi Del Bianco chief carver Walter K. Long assisted Doane Robinson conceived idea Peter Norbeck political promoter Norbeck-Williamson Act of 1929 Subjects George Washington Thomas Jefferson Theodore Roosevelt Abraham Lincoln Museum Lincoln Borglum Museum Location Black Hills of South Dakota Legacy In popular culture Mount Rushmore Anniversary coins National symbols of the United States Related Charles E. Rushmore namesake 2020 fireworks celebration Mount Rushmore Syndrome USS Rushmore LSD-14 USS Rushmore LSD-47 Portals : Biography Politics Virginia United States George Washington at Wikipedias sister projects : Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Russia Spain Romania Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece 2 Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz KulturNav Discography of American Historical Recordings People Netherlands US Congress Trove Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef NARA SNAC Te Papa New Zealand RISM Retrieved from https:en.wikipedia.orgwindex.php?titleGeorgeWashingtonoldid1250340765 Categories : George Washington 1732 births 1799 deaths 18th-century American Episcopalians 18th-century American politicians 18th-century American writers 18th-century American male writers 18th-century presidents of the United States 18th-century United States Army personnel 18th-century American planters American cartographers American foreign policy writers American Freemasons American male non-fiction writers American military personnel of the Seven Years War American militia officers American people of English descent American slave owners Surveyors from the Thirteen Colonies British America army officers Burials at Mount Vernon Candidates in the 17881789 United States presidential election Candidates in the 1792 United States presidential election Chancellors of the College of William Mary Commanders in chief Commanding Generals of the United States Army Congressional Gold Medal recipients Continental Army generals Continental Army officers from Virginia Continental Congressmen from Virginia Respiratory disease deaths in Virginia Episcopalians from Virginia Farmers from Virginia Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Founding Fathers of the United States American free speech activists Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees House of Burgesses members Members of the American Philosophical Society People from Mount Vernon Virginia People from Westmoreland County Virginia People of the American Enlightenment People of the Quasi-War People of Virginia in the French and Indian War Presidents of the United States Signers of the Continental Association Signers of the United States Constitution Spymasters United States Army generals Virginia Independents Washington and Lee University people Washington College people Washington family Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Good articles Use American English from July 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from May 2024 Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles with hAudio microformats Spoken articles Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Biodiversity Heritage Library links This page was last edited on 9 October 2024 at 21:06 UTC . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view