Jeffrey Dahmer - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Donate Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 1 Early life Toggle Early life subsection 1.1 Childhood 1.2 Adolescence and high school 2 Late teens and early 20s: first murder Toggle Late teens and early 20s: first murder subsection 2.1 Murder of Steven Hicks 2.2 College and Army service 2.3 Return to Ohio and relocation to West Allis Wisconsin 3 Late 20s and early 30s: subsequent murders Toggle Late 20s and early 30s: subsequent murders subsection 3.1 Ambassador Hotel 3.2 Intermediate murders 3.3 Oxford Apartments 3.3.1 1990 murders 3.3.2 1991 murders 4 Arrest Toggle Arrest subsection 4.1 Capture 4.2 Confession 4.3 Indictment 5 Trial Toggle Trial subsection 5.1 Closing arguments 5.2 Conviction 6 Imprisonment Toggle Imprisonment subsection 6.1 Death 6.2 Aftermath 7 Victims Toggle Victims subsection 7.1 1978 7.2 1987 7.3 1988 7.4 1989 7.5 1990 7.6 1991 8 In media Toggle In media subsection 8.1 Film 8.2 Books 8.3 Television 8.4 Theater 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References Toggle References subsection 11.1 Citations 12 Print sources 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Jeffrey Dahmer 61 languages Afrikaans Asturianu Azrbaycanca Bikol Central Catala Cestina Dansk Deutsch Eesti Espanol Euskara Francais Gaeilge Galego Hrvatski Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Islenska Italiano Kernowek Latviesu Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmal Papiamentu Plattduutsch Polski Portugues Romana Scots Shqip Simple English Slovencina srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog Turkce Tieng Viet Dusun Bundu-liwan Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia American serial killer 19601994 Dahmer redirects here. For other uses see Dahmer disambiguation . Jeffrey Dahmer Dahmers 1991 mugshot Born Jeffrey Lionel Dahmer 1960-05-21 May 21 1960 Milwaukee Wisconsin U.S. Died November 28 1994 1994-11-28 aged 34 Portage Wisconsin U.S. Cause of death Homicide by bludgeoning severe skull and brain trauma 3 Other names The Milwaukee Cannibal The Milwaukee Monster Convictions First-degree murder 16 counts n 1 Disorderly conduct 2 counts Second-degree sexual assault and enticing a child for immoral purposes 1 n 2 Criminal penalty Life imprisonment without the possibility of parole x16; total of 941 years imprisonment Details Victims 17 Span of crimes 19781991 Country United States States Ohio Wisconsin Date apprehended July 22 1991 Imprisoned at Columbia Correctional Institution Portage Wisconsin Jeffrey Lionel Dahmer d m r ; May 21 1960 November 28 1994 also known as the Milwaukee Cannibal or the Milwaukee Monster 4 was an American serial killer and sex offender who killed and dismembered seventeen males between 1978 and 1991. 5 Many of his later murders involved necrophilia 6 cannibalism and the permanent preservation of body partstypically all or part of the skeleton . 7 Although he was diagnosed with borderline personality disorder BPD 8 schizotypal personality disorder StPD 9 and a psychotic disorder Dahmer was found to be legally sane at his trial. He was convicted of fifteen of the sixteen homicides he had committed in Wisconsin and was sentenced to fifteen terms of life imprisonment on February 17 1992. 10 Dahmer was later sentenced to a sixteenth term of life imprisonment for an additional homicide committed in Ohio in 1978. On November 28 1994 Dahmer was beaten to death by Christopher Scarver a fellow inmate at the Columbia Correctional Institution in Portage Wisconsin . Early life Childhood Jeffrey Dahmer was born on May 21 1960 in Milwaukee Wisconsin 11 the first of two sons to Lionel Herbert Dahmer a Marquette University chemistry student and later a research chemist and Joyce Annette Dahmer nee Flint a teletype machine instructor. 12 13 Lionel was of German and Welsh ancestry 14 and Joyce was of Norwegian and Irish ancestry. 15 Some sources report Dahmer was deprived of attention as an infant. 16 Other sources however suggest that Dahmer was generally doted upon as an infant and toddler by both parents although his mother was known to be tense greedy for both attention and pity and argumentative with her husband and their neighbors. 17 As Dahmer entered first grade Lionels studies kept him away from home much of the time. When he was home his wifea hypochondriac who suffered from depression demanded constant attention and spent an increasing amount of time in bed. 18 On one occasion she attempted suicide using Equanil . 18 Neither parent devoted much time to their son who later recollected that from an early age he felt unsure of the solidity of the family 19 recalling extreme tension and numerous arguments between his parents during his early years. 20 Dahmer had been an energetic and happy child but became notably subdued after undergoing double hernia surgery shortly before his fourth birthday. 21 22 At elementary school Dahmer was regarded as quiet and timid. One teacher recollected she detected early signs of abandonment 23 due to his fathers absence and mothers illnesses the symptoms of which increased when she became pregnant with her second child. 24 In elementary school Dahmer had a small number of friends. 25 In October 1966 the family moved to Doylestown Ohio . 26 When Joyce gave birth in December Dahmer was allowed to choose the name of his new baby brother; he chose the name David. 27 The same year Lionel earned his degree 28 and started work as an analytical chemist in nearby Akron . 29 From an early age Dahmer manifested an interest in dead animals. His fascination with dead animals may have begun when at the age of four he saw his father removing animal bones from beneath the family home. According to Lionel Dahmer was oddly thrilled by the sound the bones made and became preoccupied with animal bones which he initially called his fiddlesticks . He occasionally searched beneath and around the family home for additional bones and explored the bodies of live animals to discover where their bones were located. 18 In May 1968 the family moved to Bath Township Summit County Ohio . 30 n 3 This address was their third in two years and the Dahmers sixth address since marriage. 32 n 4 The home stood in one and a half acres of woodland with a small hut a short walk from the house where Dahmer began collecting large insects and the skeletons of small animals such as chipmunks and squirrels. 33 Some of these remains were preserved in jars of formaldehyde and stored within the hut. 34 Two years later during a chicken dinner Dahmer asked Lionel what would happen if the chicken bones were placed in bleach. 35 Lionel pleased by what he believed to be his sons scientific curiosity demonstrated how to safely bleach and preserve animal bones. Dahmer incorporated these preserving techniques into his bone collecting. He also began collecting dead animalsincluding roadkill 36 which he would dissect and bury beside the hut with the skulls occasionally placed atop makeshift crosses. 37 According to one friend Dahmer explained that he was curious as to how animals fit together . 38 In one instance in 1975 Dahmer decapitated the carcass of a dog before nailing the body to a tree and impaling the skull upon a stick in the woodland behind his house. 39 As a prank he later invited a friend to view the display claiming he had discovered the remains by chance. 40 The same year Lionel taught his son how to preserve animal bones Joyce began increasing her daily consumption of Equanil laxatives and sleeping pills further increasing her emotional distance from her husband and children. 35 Adolescence and high school Dahmer pictured in the 1978 Revere High School yearbook Reverie From his freshman year at Revere High School Dahmer was seen as an outcast. n 5 By age 14 he had begun drinking beer and hard alcohol in the daylight hours 42 frequently concealing his liquor inside the jacket he wore to school. 36 43 When a classmate asked why he was drinking Scotch in a morning history class Dahmer shrugged and said the alcohol was my medicine . 44 45 Although largely uncommunicative in his freshman year Dahmer was seen by staff as polite and highly intelligent but earned only average grades. 34 He was a competitive tennis player 46 and played briefly in the high school band. 47 When he reached puberty Dahmer discovered he was gay; 48 he did not tell his parents. In his early teens he had a brief relationship with another teenage boy although they never had intercourse . 49 By Dahmers admission he began fantasizing about dominating and controlling a completely submissive male partner in his early to mid-teens and his masturbatory fantasies gradually evolved to his focusing on chests and torsos. These fantasies gradually became intertwined with dissection. 50 When he was about 16 Dahmer conceived a fantasy of rendering unconscious a particular male jogger he found attractive and then making sexual use of his body. On one occasion Dahmer concealed himself in bushes with a baseball bat to lie in wait for this man. However the jogger did not pass by on that particular day. Dahmer later admitted this was his first attempt to attack and render an individual submissive to him. 50 Dahmer was known to his high school peers as a class clown who often staged pranks 51 which became known as Doing a Dahmer ; these included bleating and simulating epileptic seizures or cerebral palsy 52 at school and local stores. 53 Occasionally Dahmer would perform these antics for money to purchase alcohol. 54 By 1977 Dahmers grades had declined. 55 His parents hired a private tutor with limited success. The same year in an attempt to save their marriage his parents attended counseling sessions . They continued to quarrel frequently. When Lionel discovered Joyce had engaged in a brief affair in September 1977 they decided to divorce telling their sons they wished to do so amicably. The process of their divorce soon became increasingly bitter and acrimonious and Lionel moved out of the house in early 1978 56 temporarily residing in a motel on North Cleveland Massillon Road. 57 58 In May 1978 Dahmer graduated from high school. A few weeks before his graduation one of his teachers observed Dahmer sitting close to the school parking lot drinking several cans of beer. 59 When the teacher threatened to report the matter Dahmer informed him he was experiencing a lot of problems at home and that the schools guidance counselor was aware of them. That spring Joycecontrary to a court order and without informing Lionelmoved out of the family home with David to live with relatives in Chippewa Falls Wisconsin . 60 61 Dahmer had just turned 18 and remained in the family home. 62 Dahmers parents divorce was finalized on July 24 1978. Joyce was awarded custody of their younger son and alimony payments. 63 Late teens and early 20s: first murder Murder of Steven Hicks Dahmer committed his first murder in 1978 three weeks after his graduation. On June 18 64 Dahmer picked up a hitchhiker named Steven Mark Hicks who was almost 19. 65 66 Dahmer lured Hicks to his house on the pretext of drinking. Hicks who had been hitchhiking to a rock concert at Chippewa Lake Park Ohio agreed to accompany Dahmer to his house upon the promise of a few beers with Dahmer as he had the house to himself. 65 According to Dahmer the sight of the bare-chested Hicks standing at the roadside stirred his sexual feelings although when Hicks began talking about girls he knew any sexual passes he made would be rebuffed. 67 After several hours of talking drinking and listening to music Hicks wanted to leave and I didnt want him to leave. 68 Dahmer bludgeoned Hicks with a 10-pound 4.5 kg dumbbell. He later stated he struck Hicks twice from behind 69 with the dumbbell as Hicks sat upon a chair. When Hicks fell unconscious Dahmer strangled him to death with the bar of the dumbbell then stripped the clothes from Hicks body before exploring his chest with his hands then masturbating as he stood above the corpse. Hours later Dahmer dragged the body to the basement. 69 n 6 The following day 71 Dahmer dissected Hicks body in his basement. He later buried the remains in a shallow grave in his back yard. 72 Several weeks later he unearthed the remains and pared the flesh from the bones. 73 He dissolved the flesh in acid before flushing the solution down the toilet; he crushed the bones with a sledgehammer and scattered them in the woodland behind the family home. 74 He threw Hicks necklace and the knife used to dismember him from the West Bath Road bridge into the Cuyahoga River . 75 College and Army service Six weeks after the murder of Hicks Dahmers father and his fiancee returned to his home where they discovered Dahmer living alone. That August Dahmer enrolled at Ohio State University OSU hoping to major in business. 76 Dahmers sole term at OSU was completely unproductive largely because of his persistent alcohol abuse. 77 He received failing grades in Introduction to Anthropology Classical Civilizations and Administrative Science. The only course Dahmer was successful at was Riflery where he received a B grade. His overall GPA was 0.454.0. 78 79 On one occasion Lionel paid a surprise visit to his son only to find his room strewn with empty liquor bottles. Despite his father having paid in advance for the second term Dahmer dropped out of OSU after just three months. 80 Dahmer pictured in West Germany in 1979. His off-duty drinking caused him to be deemed unsuitable for military service in 1981. In January 1979 81 on his fathers urging Dahmer enlisted in the United States Army . 82 He underwent basic training at Fort McClellan in Anniston Alabama before training as a medical specialist at Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio Texas . He was occasionally reprimanded for intoxication while stationed at Fort Sam Houston. On one occasion an instance of insubordination resulted in his entire platoon being punished earning Dahmer a severe beating from his fellow recruits. 83 On July 13 1979 Dahmer was deployed to Baumholder West Germany where he served as a combat medic in the 2nd Battalion 68th Armored Regiment 8th Infantry Division . 45 84 According to published reports in Dahmers first year of service he was an average or slightly above average soldier. 85 86 n 7 Owing to Dahmers alcohol abuse his performance deteriorated and in March 1981 he was deemed unsuitable for military service and was later discharged from the Army. 90 He received an honorable discharge as his superiors did not believe that any problems Dahmer had in the Army would be applicable to civilian life. 91 On March 24 1981 Dahmer was sent to Fort Jackson South Carolina for debriefing and provided with a plane ticket to travel anywhere in the country. Dahmer later told police he felt he could not return home to face his father so he opted to travel to Miami Beach Florida both because he was tired of the cold 92 and in an attempt to live by his own means. In Florida Dahmer found a job at a delicatessen and rented a room in a nearby motel. He spent most of his salary on alcohol and was soon evicted from the motel for non-payment. 56 Dahmer initially spent his evenings on the beach as he continued to work at the sandwich shop until phoning his father and asking to return to Ohio in September of the same year. 93 Return to Ohio and relocation to West Allis Wisconsin After his return to Ohio Dahmer initially lived with his father and stepmother and insisted on being delegated numerous chores to occupy his time while he looked for work. He continued to drink heavily and two weeks after his return was arrested for drunk and disorderly conduct . 94 He was fined 60 and given a suspended 10-day jail sentence . 95 Dahmers father tried unsuccessfully to wean his son off alcohol. In December 1981 he and his second wife sent him to live with his paternal grandmother Catherine Dahmer in West Allis Wisconsin . As she was the only family member to whom Dahmer displayed any positivity or affection 96 they hoped that both her influence and the change of location might persuade him to quit drinking find a job and live responsibly. 97 98 Initially Dahmers living arrangements with his grandmother were harmonious: he accompanied her to church willingly undertook chores actively sought work and abided by most of her house rules although he continued to drink and smoke. 99 In early 1982 he found employment as a phlebotomist at the Milwaukee Blood Plasma Center. He held this job for a total of ten months before being laid off. 96 Dahmer remained unemployed for over two years during which he lived upon whatever money his grandmother gave him. 100 Shortly before losing his job Dahmer was arrested for indecent exposure . On August 8 1982 at Wisconsin State Fair Park 101 he was observed exposing himself on the south side of the Coliseum in which 25 people were present including women and children. For this incident he was convicted and fined 50 plus court costs. 102 In January 1985 Dahmer was hired as a mixer at the Milwaukee Ambrosia Chocolate Factory where he worked from 11 p.m to 7 a.m. six nights per week with Saturday evenings off. 103 Shortly after he started this job an incident occurred in which Dahmer was propositioned by another man while reading in the West Allis Public Library. The stranger threw Dahmer a note offering to perform fellatio upon him. Although Dahmer did not respond to this proposition 104 the incident stirred the fantasies of control and dominance he had developed as a teenager and he began to familiarize himself with Milwaukees gay bars gay bathhouses and bookstores. He also stole a male mannequin from a store 105 which he briefly used for sexual stimulation until his grandmother discovered the item stowed in a closet and demanded that he discard it. 106 By late 1985 Dahmer had begun to regularly frequent the bathhouses which he later described as being relaxing places but during his sexual encounters he became frustrated at his partners moving during the act. Following his arrest he stated: I trained myself to view people as objects of pleasure instead of as people . 107 For this reason beginning in June 1986 he administered sleeping pills to his partners giving them liquor laced with sedatives . He then waited for his partner to fall asleep before performing various sexual acts. 108 To maintain an adequate supply of this medication Dahmer informed doctors he worked nights and required the tablets to adjust to that schedule. 109 After approximately 12 such instances the bathhouses administration revoked Dahmers membership and he began to use hotel rooms to continue this practice. 110 Shortly after his bathhouse memberships were revoked 111 Dahmer read a report in a newspaper regarding the upcoming funeral of an 18-year-old male. He conceived the idea of stealing the freshly interred corpse and taking it home. 112 According to Dahmer he attempted to dig up the coffin from the ground but found the soil too hard and abandoned the plan. 113 On September 8 1986 114 Dahmer was arrested upon a charge of lewd and lascivious behavior 115 for masturbating in the presence of two 12-year-old boys as he stood close to the Kinnickinnic River . 116 117 He initially claimed he had merely been urinating unaware that there were witnesses but soon admitted the offense. n 8 The charge was changed to disorderly conduct and on March 10 1987 Dahmer was sentenced to one year of probation with additional instructions to undergo counseling. 118 Late 20s and early 30s: subsequent murders Ambassador Hotel On November 20 1987 Dahmer at the time still residing with his grandmother encountered a 25-year-old man from Ontonagon Michigan named Steven Tuomi at a bar and persuaded him to return to the Ambassador Hotel in Milwaukee where Dahmer had rented a room for the evening. According to Dahmer he had no intention of killing Tuomi but intended to simply drug him and lie beside him as he explored his body. The following morning Dahmer awoke to find Tuomi lying beneath him on the bed his chest crushed in and black and blue with bruises. Blood was seeping from the corner of his mouth and Dahmers fists and one forearm were extensively bruised. Dahmer later said he had no memory of having killed Tuomi 116 117 119 and that he could not believe this had happened . 120 Dahmer purchased a large suitcase in which he transported Tuomis body to his grandmothers residence. One week later 121 he severed the head arms and legs 117 then filleted the bones from the body before cutting the flesh into pieces small enough to handle. Dahmer placed the flesh inside plastic garbage bags. 121 He wrapped the bones inside a sheet and pounded them into splinters with a sledgehammer. The dismemberment process took Dahmer approximately two hours. He disposed of all of Tuomis remains excluding the head 122 in the trash. 123 For two weeks following Tuomis killing Dahmer retained Tuomis head wrapped in a blanket. After two weeks Dahmer boiled the head in a mixture of Soilax 124 an alkali -based industrial detergent and bleach in an effort to retain the skull which he then used as stimulus for masturbation. Eventually the skull became too brittle by this bleaching process so Dahmer pulverized and disposed of it. 122 Intermediate murders According to Dahmer Tuomis murder was a pivotal incident after which he did not try to control his compulsions. 125 He began to actively seek victims most of whom he encountered in or around gay bars and would typically lure them to his grandmothers home. He would drug his victim with triazolam or temazepam before or shortly after engaging in sexual activity with them. Once his victim was unconscious he strangled them to death. 126 127 Two months after the Tuomi killing Dahmer encountered a 14-year-old Native American prostitute James Doxtator. 128 Dahmer lured him to his grandmothers residence with an offer of 50 to pose for nude pictures. They engaged in sexual activity before Dahmer drugged Doxtator and strangled him on the floor of the cellar. 129 Dahmer left the body in the cellar for one week before dismembering it in much the same manner as he had with Tuomi. He placed all of Doxtators remains excluding the skull in the trash. The skull was boiled and cleansed in bleach before Dahmer found that it too had been rendered brittle by the process. He pulverized the skull two weeks later. 130 On March 24 1988 Dahmer met a 22-year-old bisexual man Richard Guerrero outside a gay bar called the Phoenix. 130 Dahmer lured Guerrero to his grandmothers residence offering him 50 to spend the night with him. 131 He drugged Guerrero with sleeping pills strangled him with a leather strap and performed oral sex on the corpse. 131 Dahmer dismembered Guerreros body within 24 hours again disposing of the remains in the trash and retaining the skull before pulverizing it several months later. 132 On April 23 Dahmer lured Ronald Flowers Jr. to his house; however after giving Flowers a drugged coffee both he and Flowers heard Dahmers grandmother call Is that you Jeff? 133 Although Dahmer replied in a manner that led his grandmother to believe he was alone she observed that he was not alone. Because of this Dahmer was unable to kill Flowers. After Flowers became unconscious Dahmer took him to the County General Hospital. 134 135 In September 1988 Dahmers grandmother asked him to move out largely because of his drinking his habit of bringing young men to her house late at night and the foul smells emanating from the basement and the garage. Dahmer found a one-bedroom apartment at 808 North 24th Street 103 and moved into the residence on September 25. 136 Two days later he was arrested for drugging and sexually fondling a 13-year-old boy whom he had lured to his home on the pretext of posing nude for photographs. 137 138 Dahmers father hired attorney Gerald Boyle to defend his son. At Boyles request Dahmer underwent a series of psychological evaluations prior to his court hearings. The evaluations found that Dahmer harbored deep feelings of alienation . A second evaluation two months later revealed Dahmer to be an impulsive individual suspicious of others and dismayed by his lack of accomplishments in life. His probation officer also referenced a 1987 diagnosis of Dahmer suffering from a schizoid personality disorder for presentation to the court. 139 On January 30 1989 Dahmer pleaded guilty to the charges of second-degree sexual assault and of enticing a child for immoral purposes. 2 Sentencing was suspended until May. 140 On March 20 Dahmer commenced a ten-day Easter absence from work during which he moved back into his grandmothers home. 141 Two months after his conviction and two months prior to his sentencing Dahmer murdered his fifth victim a 24-year-old mixed-race aspiring model Anthony Sears whom he met at a gay bar on March 25 1989. According to Dahmer on this particular occasion he was not looking to commit a crime; however shortly before closing time that evening Sears just started talking to me . Dahmer lured Sears to his grandmothers home where the pair engaged in oral sex before Dahmer drugged and strangled Sears. 6 The following morning Dahmer placed the corpse in his grandmothers bathtub where he decapitated the body before attempting to flay the corpse. 6 He stripped the flesh from the body and pulverized the bones which he disposed of in the trash. According to Dahmer he found Sears exceptionally attractive and Sears was the first victim from whom he permanently retained any body parts: he preserved Sears head and genitalia in acetone 142 and stored them in a wooden box which he later placed in his work locker. n 9 When he moved to a new address the following year he took the remains there. 144 On May 23 1989 140 Dahmer was sentenced to five years probation and one year in the House of Correction with work release permitted so he could keep his job. He was also required to register as a sex offender . 145 Two months before his scheduled release Dahmer was paroled from this regimen. 146 His five years probation imposed in 1989 began at this point. 147 Dahmer temporarily moved back to his grandmothers home in West Allis. 148 Oxford Apartments 1990 murders On May 14 1990 Dahmer moved out of his grandmothers house and into 924 North 25th Street Apartment 213 taking Sears mummified head and genitals with him. 149 150 n 10 Although located in a high-crime area Dahmers new apartment was close to his workplace was furnished and at 300 per month inclusive of all bills excluding electricity was economical. 149 Within one week of his moving to this address Dahmer killed his sixth victim Raymond Smith. Smith was a 32-year-old prostitute whom Dahmer lured to his apartment with the promise of 50 for sex. 152 Inside the apartment he gave Smith a drink laced with seven sleeping pills then manually strangled him. 153 The following day Dahmer purchased a Polaroid camera with which he took several pictures of Smiths body in suggestive positions before dismembering him in the bathroom. He boiled the legs arms and pelvis in a steel kettle with Soilax which allowed him to rinse the bones in his sink. 153 Dahmer dissolved the remainder of Smiths skeletonexcluding the skullin a container filled with acid. He later spray-painted Smiths skull which he placed alongside the skull of Sears upon a black towel inside a filing cabinet. 154 Approximately one week after the murder of Smith on or about May 27 Dahmer lured another young man to his apartment. On this occasion Dahmer accidentally consumed the drink laden with sedatives intended for his guest. When he awoke the following day he discovered the man had stolen several items of clothing 300 and a watch. 155 Dahmer never reported this incident to the police although on May 29 he divulged to his probation officer that he had been robbed. 156 In June 1990 Dahmer lured a 27-year-old acquaintance Edward Smith to his apartment where he drugged and strangled him. On this occasion rather than immediately acidifying the skeleton or repeating previous processes of bleaching which had rendered previous victims skulls brittle Dahmer placed Smiths skeleton in his freezer for several months in the hope it would not retain moisture. Freezing the skeleton did not remove moisture and the skeleton of this victim was acidified several months later. Dahmer accidentally destroyed the skull when he placed it in the oven to drya process that caused the skull to explode. Dahmer later informed police he had felt rotten about Smiths murder as he had been unable to retain any parts of his body. 157 It was my way of remembering their appearance their physical beauty. I also wanted to keep ... if I couldnt keep them there with me whole I at least could keep their skeletons. Jeffrey Dahmer recollecting his motivations for both photographing his victims and retaining sections of their skeletal structure. February 1993. 158 Less than three months after the murder of Edward Smith Dahmer encountered a 22-year-old Chicago native named Ernest Miller outside a bookstore on the corner of North 27th Street. Miller agreed to accompany Dahmer to his apartment for 50 and further agreed to allow him to listen to his heart and stomach. When Dahmer attempted to perform oral sex upon Miller he was informed Thatll cost you extra whereupon Dahmer gave Miller a drink laced with two sleeping pills. 159 On this occasion Dahmer had only two sleeping pills to give his victim. Therefore he killed Miller by slashing his carotid artery with the same knife he used to dissect his victims bodies. Miller bled to death within minutes. 160 Dahmer then posed the nude body for various suggestive Polaroid photographs before placing it in his bathtub for dismemberment. Dahmer repeatedly kissed and talked to the severed head while he dismembered the remainder of the body. 160 Dahmer wrapped Millers heart liver biceps and portions of flesh from the legs in plastic bags and placed them in the freezer for later consumption. 7 He boiled the remaining flesh and organs into a jelly-like substance using Soilax which enabled him to rinse the flesh off the skeleton which he intended to retain. To preserve the skeleton Dahmer placed the bones in a light bleach solution for 24 hours before allowing them to dry upon a cloth for one week. The severed head was initially placed in the refrigerator before being stripped of flesh then painted and coated with enamel. 161 Three weeks after the murder of Miller on September 24 Dahmer encountered a 22-year-old father of two named David Thomas at the Grand Avenue Mall . 162 He persuaded him to return to his apartment for a few drinks with additional money on offer if he would pose for photographs. In his statement to police after his arrest Dahmer said that after giving Thomas a drink laden with sedatives he did not feel attracted to him but was afraid to allow him to awaken fearing that he would be angry over having been drugged. Therefore he strangled him and dismembered the bodyintentionally retaining no body parts whatsoever. He photographed the dismemberment process and retained these photographs which later aided in Thomass identification. 162 Following the murder of Thomas Dahmer did not kill anyone for almost five months although on a minimum of five occasions between October 1990 and February 1991 he unsuccessfully attempted to lure men to his apartment. 163 He regularly complained of feelings of both anxiety and depression to his probation officer throughout 1990 with frequent references to his sexuality his solitary lifestyle financial difficulties andshortly before Thanksgiving his apprehension regarding meeting and facing his father and younger brother. 164 On several occasions Dahmer also referred to harboring suicidal thoughts . 165 1991 murders In February 1991 Dahmer observed a 17-year-old named Curtis Straughter standing at a bus stop near Marquette University . According to Dahmer he lured Straughter into his apartment with an offer of money for posing for nude photos 166 with the added incentive of sexual intercourse. Dahmer drugged Straughter cuffed his hands behind his back then strangled him to death with a leather strap. He then dismembered Straughter retaining his skull hands and genitals and photographing each stage of the dismemberment process. 167 Less than two months later on April 7 Dahmer encountered a 19-year-old named Errol Lindsey 168 169 walking to get a key cut. Dahmer lured Lindsey to his apartment where he drugged him then drilled a hole in his skull through which he injected hydrochloric acid with a baster . 170 According to Dahmer Lindsey awoke after this experiment which Dahmer had conceived in the hope of inducing a permanent unresistant submissive state saying: I have a headache. What time is it? 171 172 In response to this Dahmer again drugged Lindsey then strangled him. He decapitated Lindsey and retained his skull. 173 He then flayed Lindseys body placing the skin in a solution of cold water and salt for several weeks in the hope of permanently retaining it. Reluctantly he disposed of Lindseys skin when he noted it had become too frayed and brittle. 173 By 1991 fellow residents of the Oxford Apartments had repeatedly complained to the buildings manager Sopa Princewill of the foul smells emanating from Apartment 213 in addition to the sounds of falling objects and the occasional sound of a chainsaw. 174 Princewill contacted Dahmer in response to these complaints on several occasions although he initially excused the odors emanating from his apartment as being caused by his freezer breaking causing the contents to become spoiled . On later occasions he informed Princewill that the reason for the resurgence of the odor was that several of his tropical fish had recently died and that he would take care of the matter. 175 On May 24 1991 Dahmer encountered 31-year-old aspiring model Tony Hughes at a nightclub. He was lured to Dahmers apartment with an offer of money to pose for photographs. n 11 Hughes was drugged into unconsciousness before Dahmer injected hydrochloric acid into his skull in an effort to disable his will and render him submissive although on this occasion the drilling and injection proved fatal. 177 Konerak Sinthasomphone On the afternoon of May 26 1991 Dahmer encountered a 14-year-old Lao teenager Konerak Sinthasomphone on Wisconsin Avenue. Unknown to Dahmer Sinthasomphone was the younger brother of the boy he had molested in 1988. 178 Dahmer offered Sinthasomphone money to accompany him to his apartment to pose for Polaroid pictures. According to Dahmer Sinthasomphone was initially reluctant to the proposal before changing his mind and accompanying him to his apartment where he posed for two pictures in his underwear before Dahmer drugged him into unconsciousness and performed oral sex on him. 179 Before Sinthasomphone fell unconscious Dahmer led the boy into his bedroom where the body of Tony Hughes whom Dahmer had killed three days earlier lay naked on the floor. 180 According to Dahmer he believed that Sinthasomphone saw this body yet did not react to seeing the bloated corpselikely because of the effects of the sleeping pills he had ingested. 181 On this occasion Dahmer drilled a single narrow hole into the crown of Sinthasomphones skull through which he injected hydrochloric acid into the frontal lobe . 179 Dahmer then drank several beers while lying alongside Sinthasomphone before briefly falling asleep then leaving his apartment to drink at a bar and purchase more alcohol. 182 In the early morning hours of May 27 Dahmer returned toward his apartment to discover Sinthasomphone sitting naked on the corner of 25th and State talking in Lao with three distressed young women standing near him. 183 184 Dahmer approached the women and told them that Sinthasomphone whom he referred to by the alias John Hmong 185 186 was his friend and attempted to lead him to his apartment by the arm. The three women dissuaded Dahmer explaining they had phoned 9-1-1 . 187 Upon the arrival of two Milwaukee police officers John Balcerzak and Joseph Gabrish 188 Dahmers demeanor relaxed: he told the officers that Sinthasomphone was his 19-year-old boyfriend that he had drunk too much following a quarrel 189 and that he frequently behaved in this manner when intoxicated . Dahmer added his lover had consumed Jack Daniels whiskey that evening. The three women were exasperated and when one of the trio attempted to indicate to one of the officersboth of whom had observed no injuries beyond a scrape to Sinthasomphones knee and believed him to be intoxicated 190 that Sinthasomphone had blood upon his testicles was bleeding from his rectum and that he had seemingly struggled against Dahmers attempts to walk him to his apartment prior to their arrival n 12 the officer harshly informed her to butt out 191 shut the hell up and to not interfere. 194 Shortly after the arrival of the Milwaukee police officers three members of the Milwaukee Fire Department arrived at the scene. These individuals also examined Sinthasomphone for injuries and provided a yellow blanket for the police officers to cover Sinthasomphone. One of the three believed Sinthasomphone needed treatment but the police officers directed the fire department personnel to leave. 195 193 Shortly thereafter officer Richard Porubcan arrived at the scene. n 13 He and Gabrishfollowed by Balcerzakescorted Dahmer and Sinthasomphone to Dahmers apartment as Dahmer repeatedly commented on the general crime in the neighborhood and of his appreciation of the police. 196 Inside his apartment and in an effort to verify his claim that he and Sinthasomphone were lovers Dahmer showed the officers the two semi-nude Polaroid pictures he had taken of Sinthasomphone the previous evening. Though Balcerzak said he smelled nothing unusual Gabrish later stated he noted a strange scent reminiscent of excrement inside the apartment. 197 This odor emanated from the decomposing body of Hughes. 198 199 Dahmer stated that to investigate this odor one officer simply peeked his head around the bedroom but really didnt take a good look. 191 n 14 The officers then left with a departing remark that Dahmer take good care of Sinthasomphone. 201 This incident was listed by the officers as a domestic dispute . 191 n 15 Upon the departure of the three officers from his apartment Dahmer again injected hydrochloric acid into Sinthasomphones brain. This second injection proved fatal. The following day May 28 Dahmer took a days leave from work to devote himself to the dismemberment of the bodies of Sinthasomphone and Hughes. He retained both victims skulls. 203 On June 30 Dahmer traveled to Chicago where he encountered a 20-year-old named Matt Turner at a bus station. 204 Turner accepted Dahmers offer to travel to Milwaukee for a professional photo shoot . At the apartment Dahmer drugged strangled and dismembered Turner and placed his head and internal organs in separate plastic bags in the freezer. 205 Turner was not reported missing. Five days later on July 5 Dahmer lured 23-year-old Jeremiah Weinberger from a Chicago bar to his apartment on the promise of spending the weekend with him. He drugged Weinberger and twice injected boiling water through his skull sending him into a coma from which he died two days later. 205 n 16 On July 15 Dahmer encountered 24-year-old 207 Oliver Lacy at the corner of 27th and Kilbourn. 208 Lacy agreed to Dahmers ruse of posing nude for photographs and accompanied him to his apartment where the pair engaged in tentative sexual activity before Dahmer drugged Lacy. On this occasion Dahmer intended to prolong the time he spent with Lacy while alive. After unsuccessfully attempting to render Lacy unconscious with chloroform 209 he phoned his workplace to request a days absence; this was granted although the next day he was suspended. 207 After strangling Lacy Dahmer had sex with the corpse before dismembering him. 207 He placed Lacys head and heart in the refrigerator and his skeleton in the freezer. 207 Four days later on July 19 Dahmer received word that he was dismissed. 210 Upon receipt of this news Dahmer lured 25-year-old Joseph Bradehoft to his apartment. Bradehoft was strangled and left lying on Dahmers bed covered with a sheet for two days. On July 21 Dahmer removed the sheet to find the head covered in maggots. He decapitated the body cleaned the head and placed it in the refrigerator. 211 He later acidified Bradehofts torso along with those of two other victims killed within the previous month. 212 213 Arrest Capture On July 22 1991 Dahmer approached three men with an offer of 100 to accompany him to his apartment to pose for nude photographs 214 drink beer and simply keep him company. 215 One of the trio 32-year-old Tracy Edwards agreed to accompany him to his apartment. Upon entering Dahmers apartment Edwards noted a foul odor and several boxes of hydrochloric acid on the floor which Dahmer claimed to use for cleaning bricks. After some minor conversation Edwards responded to Dahmers request to turn his head and view his tropical fish whereupon Dahmer placed a handcuff upon his wrist. When Edwards asked Whats happening? Dahmer unsuccessfully attempted to cuff his wrists together 216 then told Edwards to accompany him to the bedroom to pose for nude pictures. While inside the bedroom Edwards noted nude male posters on the wall and that a videotape of The Exorcist III was playing. 215 217 He also noted a blue 57-gallon drum in the corner from which a strong odor emanated. 218 Dahmer then brandished a knife and informed Edwards he intended to take nude pictures of him. In an attempt to appease Dahmer Edwards unbuttoned his shirt saying he would allow him to do so if he would remove the handcuffs and put the knife away. In response to this promise Dahmer simply turned his attention towards the TV. Edwards observed Dahmer rocking back and forth and chanting before turning his attention back to him. He placed his head on Edwards chest listened to his heartbeat and with the knife pressed against his intended victim informed Edwards he intended to eat his heart. 219 In continuous attempts to prevent Dahmer from attacking him Edwards repeated that he was Dahmers friend and that he was not going to run away. 220 Edwards had decided he was going to either jump from a window or run through the unlocked front door upon the next available opportunity. When Edwards next stated he needed to use the bathroom he asked if they could sit with a beer in the living room where there was air conditioning. Dahmer consented and the pair walked to the living room when Edwards exited the bathroom. Inside the living room Edwards waited until he observed Dahmer have a momentary lapse of concentration before requesting to use the bathroom again. 221 When Edwards rose from the couch he noted Dahmer was not holding the handcuffs whereupon Edwards punched him in the face knocking Dahmer off balance and ran out the front door. 222 At 11:30 p.m. on July 22 Edwards flagged down two Milwaukee police officers Robert Rauth and Rolf Mueller at the corner of North 25th Street. The officers noted Edwards had a handcuff attached to his wrist 223 224 whereupon he explained to the officers that a freak had placed the handcuffs upon him and asked if the police could remove them. When the officers handcuff keys failed to fit the brand of handcuffs Edwards agreed to accompany the officers to the apartment where Edwards stated he had spent the previous five hours before escaping. 223 When the officers and Edwards arrived at Apartment 213 Dahmer invited the trio inside and acknowledged he had placed the handcuffs upon Edwards although he offered no explanation as to why he had done so. At this point Edwards divulged to the officers that Dahmer had also brandished a large knife upon him and that this had happened in the bedroom. Dahmer made no comment to this revelation indicating to one of the officers Mueller that the key to the handcuffs was in his bedside dresser. As Mueller entered the bedroom Dahmer attempted to pass Mueller to retrieve the key himself whereupon the second officer present Rauth informed him to back off . 225 In the bedroom Mueller noted there was a large knife beneath the bed. He saw an open drawer that upon closer inspection contained scores of Polaroid picturesmany of which were of human bodies in various stages of dismemberment. Mueller noted the decor indicated they had been taken in the same apartment in which they were standing. Mueller walked into the living room to show them to his partner 226 uttering the words These are for real. 225 When Dahmer saw that Mueller was holding several of his Polaroids he fought with the officers in an effort to resist arrest . The officers quickly overpowered him cuffed his hands behind his back and called a second squad car for backup. At this point Mueller opened the refrigerator to reveal the freshly severed head of a black male on the bottom shelf. 227 As Dahmer lay pinned on the floor beneath Rauth he turned his head towards the officers and muttered the words: For what I did I should be dead. 228 A more detailed search of the apartment conducted by the Milwaukee polices Criminal Investigation Bureau revealed a total of four severed heads in Dahmers kitchen. A total of seven skullssome painted some bleachedwere found in Dahmers bedroom and inside a closet. 229 Investigators discovered collected blood drippings upon a tray at the bottom of Dahmers refrigerator plus two human hearts 230 and a portion of arm muscle each wrapped inside plastic bags upon the shelves. In Dahmers freezer investigators discovered an entire torso plus a bag of human organs and flesh stuck to the ice at the bottom. 231 Private contractors from the Fire Departments Hazardous Materials Unit remove the 57-gallon drum from Dahmers apartment July 23 1991. 232 Elsewhere in Apartment 213 investigators discovered two entire skeletons a pair of severed hands two severed and preserved penises a mummified scalp and in the 57-gallon drum three further dismembered torsos dissolving in the acid solution. A total of 74 Polaroid pictures detailing the dismemberment of Dahmers victims were found. 233 In reference to the recovery of body parts and artifacts at 924 North 25th Street the chief medical examiner later stated: It was more like dismantling someones museum than an actual crime scene. 234 Confession Beginning in the early hours of July 23 1991 Dahmer was questioned by Detective Patrick Kennedy as to the murders he had committed and the evidence found at his apartment. Over the following two weeks Kennedy and later Detective Dennis Murphy conducted numerous interviews with Dahmer that when combined totaled over 60 hours. 235 236 Dahmer waived his right to have a lawyer present throughout his interrogations 237 adding he wished to confess all as he had created this horror and it only makes sense I do everything to put an end to it. 238 He readily admitted to having murdered sixteen young men in Wisconsin since 1987 with one further victimSteven Hickskilled in Ohio in 1978. 239 Most of Dahmers victims had been rendered unconscious prior to their murder although some had died as a result of having acid or boiling water injected into their brain. As he had no memory of the killing of his second victim Steven Tuomi he was unsure whether he was unconscious when beaten to death although he did concede it was possible that his viewing the exposed chest of Tuomi while in a drunken stupor may have led him to unsuccessfully attempt to tear Tuomis heart from his chest. 240 Almost all the murders Dahmer committed after moving into the Oxford Apartments had involved a ritual of posing the victims bodies in suggestive positionstypically with the chest thrust outwardsprior to dismemberment. 241 Dahmer readily admitted to engaging in necrophilia with several of his victims bodies including performing sexual acts with their viscera 241 as he dismembered their bodies in his bathtub. Having noted that much of the blood pooled inside his victims chest after death Dahmer first removed their internal organs then suspended the torso so the blood drained into his bathtub before dicing any organs he did not wish to retain and paring the flesh from the body. 242 The bones he wished to dispose of were pulverized or acidified with Soilax and bleach solutions used to aid in the preservation of the skeletons and skulls he wished to keep. 154 Dahmer confessed to having consumed the hearts liver biceps and portions of thigh 243 of three victims he had killed at the Oxford Apartments Raymond Smith Ernest Miller and Oliver Lacy and to have retained the flesh and organs of other victims for intended consumption. 244 Typically Dahmer would tenderize the body parts he intended to consume prior to preparing meals flavored with various condiments. 236 245 n 17 Referencing his reasons for consuming his victims Dahmer stated he had initially consumed portions of his victims due to curiosity before adding: I suppose in an odd way it made me feel they were even more a permanent part of me. 246 Describing the increase in his rate of killing in the two months prior to his arrest Dahmer stated he had been completely swept along 247 with his compulsion to kill adding: It was an incessant and never-ending desire to be with someone at whatever cost. Someone good looking really nice looking. It just filled my thoughts all day long. 248 When asked as to why he had preserved a total of seven skulls and the entire skeletons of two victims Dahmer stated he had been in the process of constructing a private altar of victims skulls which he had intended to display on the black table located in his living room and upon which he had photographed the bodies of many of his victims. 249 An illustration provided by Dahmer depicting the private altar he had been planning to create at the time of his July 1991 arrest This display of skulls was to be adorned at each side with the complete skeletons of Miller and Lacy. The four severed heads found in his kitchen were to have all flesh removed and used in this altar as was the skull of at least one future victim. Incense sticks were to be placed at each end of the black table above which Dahmer intended to place a large blue lamp with extending blue globe lights. 249 The entire construction was to be placed before a window covered with a black opaque shower curtain in front of which Dahmer intended to sit in a black leather chair. 249 When asked in a November 18 1991 interview to whom the altar was dedicated Dahmer replied: Myself ... It was a place where I could feel at home. He further described his intended altar as a place for meditation from where he believed he could draw a sense of power adding: If this his arrest had happened six months later thats what they would have found. 249 Indictment On July 25 1991 Dahmer was charged with four counts of first-degree murder . By August 22 he had been charged with a further eleven murders committed in Wisconsin. 238 On September 14 investigators in Ohio having uncovered hundreds of bone fragments in woodland behind the address in which Dahmer had confessed to killing his first victim formally identified two molars and a vertebra with X-ray records of Hicks. 250 Three days later Dahmer was charged by authorities in Ohio with Hicks murder. 251 Dahmer was not charged with the attempted murder of Edwards 238 nor with the murder of Tuomi. 252 He was not charged with Tuomis murder because the Milwaukee County District Attorney only brought charges where murder could be proven beyond a reasonable doubt 253 and Dahmer had no memory of actually committing this particular murder for which no physical evidence of the crime existed. 253 At a scheduled preliminary hearing on January 13 1992 254 Dahmer pleaded guilty but insane to 15 counts of murder. 255 Trial Dahmers trial began on January 30 1992. 256 He was tried in Milwaukee for the 15 counts of first-degree murder 257 before Judge Laurence Gram. 258 By pleading guilty on January 13 to the charges brought against him Dahmer had waived his rights to a trial to establish guilt as defined in Wisconsin law. 259 Attorneys at Dahmers trial debated whether he suffered from either a mental or a personality disorder. 259 The prosecution claimed that any disorders did not deprive Dahmer of the ability to appreciate the criminality of his conduct or to deprive him of the ability to resist his impulses . The defense argued that Dahmer suffered from a mental disease 260 and was driven by obsessions and impulses he was unable to control. 261 Defense experts argued that Dahmer was insane due to his necrophilic drivehis compulsion to have sexual encounters with corpses. Defense expert Fred Berlin testified that Dahmer was unable to conform his conduct at the time that he committed the crimes due to his paraphilia or more specifically necrophilia. Judith Becker a professor of psychiatry and psychology was the second expert witness for the defense. Becker diagnosed Dahmer as a necrophiliac although she added Dahmer had informed her he preferred comatose sexual partners to deceased ones 75 percent of the time. 262 The final defense expert to testify forensic psychiatrist Carl Wahlstrom diagnosed Dahmer with necrophilia borderline personality disorder schizotypal personality disorder alcohol dependence and a psychotic disorder . 263 264 265 On February 8 Fred Fosdal testified on behalf of the prosecution. 266 Fosdal testified to his belief that Dahmer was without mental disease or defect at the time he committed the murders. He described Dahmer as a calculating and cunning individual able to differentiate between right and wrong with the ability to control his actions and whose lust overpowered his morals . 267 Although Fosdal did state his belief that Dahmer was a paraphiliac his conclusion was that Dahmer was not a sadist . 245 The second and final witness to appear for the prosecution forensic psychiatrist Park Dietz began his testimony on February 12. Dietz testified that he did not believe Dahmer had any form of mental disease or defect at the time that he committed the crimes stating that Dahmer went to great lengths to be alone with his victim and to have no witnesses. 268 He explained that there was ample evidence that Dahmer prepared in advance for each murder and therefore his crimes were not impulsive. 269 270 Although Dietz did concede any acquisition of a paraphilia was not a matter of personal choice 268 he stated his belief that Dahmers habit of becoming intoxicated prior to committing each of the murders was significant; If he had an impulse to kill or a compulsion to kill Dietz testified he wouldnt have to drink alcohol to overcome it. He only has to drink alcohol to overcome it because he is inhibited against killing. 271 Dietz noted that Dahmer strongly identified with the villains of The Exorcist III and Return of the Jedi particularly the level of power held by these characters. Expounding on the significance of these movies on Dahmers psyche and many of the murders committed at the Oxford Apartments Dietz explained that Dahmer occasionally viewed scenes from these films before searching for a victim. 272 Dietz diagnosed Dahmer with substance use disorder paraphilia and schizotypal personality disorder. 273 Forensic psychiatrist George Palermo and clinical psychologist Samuel Friedman testified about Dahmers pathology independently of either prosecution or defense. Palermo stated that Dahmer was motivated to commit murder by a pent-up aggression within himself. He killed those men because he wanted to kill the source of his homosexual attraction to them. In killing them he killed what he hated in himself. Palermo concluded that Dahmer had a severe mixed personality disorder 274 with antisocial obsessive-compulsive sadistic fetishistic borderline and necrophilic features but otherwise legally sane. 275 Friedman testified that it was a longing for companionship that caused Dahmer to kill and testified that Dahmer was not psychotic. He described Dahmer as amiable pleasant to be with courteous with a sense of humor conventionally handsome and charming in manner. He was and still is a bright young man. 7 276 He diagnosed Dahmer with a personality disorder not otherwise specified featuring borderline obsessive-compulsive and sadistic traits. 277 Closing arguments The trial lasted two weeks. 169 On February 14 both attorneys delivered their closing arguments to the jury. Each attorney was allowed to speak for two hours. Defense attorney Gerald Boyle argued first. Repeatedly referring to the testimony of the mental health professionalsalmost all of whom had agreed Dahmer was afflicted with a mental disease 278 Boyle argued that Dahmers compulsive killings had been a result of a sickness he discovered not chose. 279 280 Boyle portrayed Dahmer as a desperately lonely and profoundly sick individual so out of control he could not conform his conduct anymore. 281 Following the defense counsels 75-minute closing argument Michael McCann delivered his closing argument for the prosecution describing Dahmer as a sane man in full control of his actions who simply strove to avoid detection. 282 279 McCann described Dahmer as a calculating individual who killed to control his victims and retained their bodies merely to afford himself a prolonged period of sexual pleasure. 283 McCann argued that by pleading guilty but insane to the charges Dahmer was seeking to escape responsibility for his crimes. 279 Conviction On February 15 the court reconvened to hear the verdict: Dahmer was ruled to be sane and not suffering from a mental disorder at the time of each of the 15 murders for which he was tried although in each count two of the twelve jurors signified their dissent . 284 Formal sentencing was postponed until February 17. On this date Dahmers attorney announced his client wished to address the court. Dahmer then approached a lectern and read from a statement prepared by himself and his defense as he faced the judge. 285 In this statement Dahmer emphasized that he had never desired freedom following his arrest and that he frankly wished for his own death. He further stressed that none of his murders had been motivated by hatred that he understood that nothing he either said or did could undo the terrible harm he had caused to the families of his victims and the city of Milwaukee and that he and his doctors believed his criminal behavior had been motivated by mental disorders . Dahmer added that this medical knowledge had given him some peace and that although he understood that society would never forgive him he hoped God would. 286 Dahmer closed his statement with: I know my time in prison will be terrible but I deserve whatever I get because of what I have done. Thank you your honor and I am prepared for your sentence which I know will be the maximum. I ask for no consideration. 286 He then returned to his seat to await formal sentencing. 287 Dahmer was then sentenced to life imprisonment plus ten years upon the first two counts. 288 The remaining thirteen counts carried a mandatory sentence of life imprisonment plus seventy years. The death penalty was not an option for Judge Gram to consider at the penalty phase as Wisconsin had abolished capital punishment in 1853. 289 Upon hearing of Dahmers sentencing his father Lionel and stepmother Shari requested to be allowed a ten-minute private meeting with their son before he was transferred to the Columbia Correctional Institution in Portage to begin his sentence. 287 This request was granted and the trio exchanged hugs and well-wishes before Dahmer was escorted away. Three months after his conviction in Milwaukee Dahmer was extradited to Ohio to be tried for the murder of his first victim Steven Hicks. 290 In a court hearing lasting just 45 minutes 291 Dahmer again pleaded guilty to the charges and was sentenced to a 16th term of life imprisonment on May 1 1992. 292 n 18 Imprisonment The Columbia Correctional Institution . Dahmer was imprisoned at this facility until his death in 1994. Upon sentencing Dahmer was transferred to the Columbia Correctional Institution. 294 For the first year of his incarceration Dahmer was placed in solitary confinement due to concerns for his physical safety should he come into contact with fellow inmates. He received ample correspondence from individuals across the world with several individuals donating money which he spent on items such as cassette recordings stationery cigarettes and magazines. 295 Upon Dahmers request after one year in solitary confinement he was transferred to a less secure unit 296 where he was assigned a two-hour daily work detail cleaning the toilet block. 297 This work detail later expanded to include cleaning the prison gymnasium. 298 Shortly after completing his lengthy confessions in 1991 Dahmer had requested to Detective Murphy that he be given a copy of the Bible . 259 This request was granted and Dahmer gradually devoted himself to Christianity and became a born-again Christian . On his fathers urging he also read creationist books from the Institute for Creation Research . 299 In May 1994 Dahmer was baptized by Roy Ratcliff a minister in the Church of Christ and a graduate of Oklahoma Christian University whom he had met on April 20. 300 This service was conducted in the prison whirlpool. 301 302 Following Dahmers baptism Ratcliff visited him every week. 300 The two regularly discussed the prospect of death and Ratcliff later divulged that in the months prior to his murder Dahmer had questioned whether he was sinning against God by continuing to live. 303 Referring to his crimes in a 1994 interview with Stone Phillips on Dateline NBC Dahmer had stated: If a person doesnt think that there is a God to be accountable to then whats the point of trying to modify your behavior to keep it within acceptable ranges? Thats how I thought anyway. 304 On July 3 1994 a fellow inmate Osvaldo Durruthy attempted to slash Dahmers throat with a razor embedded in a toothbrush as Dahmer sat in the prison chapel after the weekly church service was concluded. 305 306 Dahmer received superficial wounds and was not seriously hurt in this incident. 307 According to Dahmers family he had long been ready to die and accepted any punishment which he might endure in prison. In addition to his father and stepmother maintaining regular contact Dahmers mother Joyce also maintained regular contact with her son. Prior to his arrest the two had not seen each other since Christmas 1983. 308 Joyce related that in her weekly phone calls whenever she expressed concerns for her sons physical well-being Dahmer responded with comments to the effect of: It doesnt matter Mom. I dont care if something happens to me. 303 Death On the morning of November 28 1994 Dahmer left his cell to conduct his assigned work detail. Accompanying him were two fellow inmates Jesse Anderson and Christopher Scarver . The trio were left unsupervised in the showers of the prison gym for approximately 20 minutes. At approximately 8:10 a.m. 309 Dahmer was discovered on the floor of the bathrooms of the gym suffering from extreme head wounds; 310 he had been severely bludgeoned about the head and face with a 20-inch 51-centimeter metal bar. 309 His head had also been repeatedly struck against the wall in the assault. 296 Although Dahmer was still alive and was rushed to a nearby hospital he was pronounced dead one hour later. Anderson had been beaten with the same instrument; he died from his wounds two days later. 303 311 Scarver who was serving a life sentence for a murder committed in 1990 informed authorities he had first attacked Dahmer with the metal bar as Dahmer was cleaning a staff locker room before attacking Anderson as Anderson cleaned an inmate locker room. According to Scarver Dahmer did not yell or make any noise as he was attacked. Immediately after attacking both men Scarver who was thought to be schizophrenic returned to his cell and informed a prison guard: God told me to do it. Jesse Anderson and Jeffrey Dahmer are dead. 296 312 313 Scarver was adamant he had not planned the attacks in advance 314 although he later divulged to investigators he had concealed the 20-inch iron bar used to kill both men in his clothing shortly before the killings. 313 n 19 Upon learning of his death Dahmers mother Joyce responded angrily to the media: Now is everybody happy? Now that hes bludgeoned to death is that good enough for everyone? 315 The response of the families of Dahmers victims was mixed: some celebrated the news while others were saddened. Catherine Lacy the mother of victim Oliver Lacy remarked: The hurt is worse now because hes not suffering like we are. 172 The district attorney who prosecuted Dahmer cautioned against turning Scarver into a folk hero saying that Dahmers death was still murder. 303 On May 15 1995 Scarver was sentenced to two additional terms of life imprisonment for the murders of Dahmer and Anderson. 316 Dahmer had stated in his will that he wished for no services to be conducted and that he wished to be cremated . 317 In September 1995 Dahmers body was cremated and his ashes divided between his parents. 318 Owing to a disagreement between his parents as to whether Dahmers brain should be retained for medical research this organ was initially retained but later cremated in December 1995. 319 320 Aftermath On August 5 1991 as the nature and scale of Dahmers crimes initially came to light a candlelight vigil to celebrate and heal the Milwaukee community 321 was attended by more than 400 people. Present at the vigil were community leaders gay rights activists and family members of several of Dahmers victims. Organizers stated the purpose of the vigil was to enable Milwaukeeans to share their feelings of pain and anger over what happened . 10 Dahmers murders were committed at a time of heightened racial tension in Milwaukee. A professor of community studies at the University of WisconsinMilwaukee Walter Farrell later stated race relations in the city had been in a state of disrepair for nearly a decade at the time of Dahmers arrest. n 20 In an August 1991 interview given to the Christian Science Monitor Farrell stated that news of the murders as well as the conduct of Milwaukee police officers John Balcerzak and Joseph Gabrish with regards to victim Konerak Sinthasomphone exacerbated and highlighted racial tensions within the city. 322 Milwaukees gay scene was generally underground and transient in nature at the time of Dahmers murders with many sexually active gay men using aliases. 323 Many in the citys gay community were nervous of the intentions of others after the extent of Dahmers murders became known although the fear and distrust generated by Dahmers crimes was short-lived. As the 1990s progressed the usage of aliases became less common among members of Milwaukees gay community. 323 The Oxford Apartments at 924 North 25th Street where Dahmer had killed twelve of his victims were demolished in November 1992. 324 The site is now a vacant lot. Alternate plans to convert the site into either a memorial garden a playground or to reconstruct new housing have failed to materialize. Dahmers estate was awarded to the families of eleven of his victims who had sued for damages. In 1996 Thomas Jacobson a lawyer representing eight of the families announced a planned auction of Dahmers estate. Although victims relatives stated the motivation was not greed the announcement sparked controversy. 325 326 A civic group Milwaukee Civic Pride was quickly established in an effort to raise the funds to purchase and destroy many of Dahmers possessions. n 21 The group pledged 407 225 including a 100 000 gift by Milwaukee real estate developer Joseph Zilber for purchase of Dahmers estate; five of the eight families represented by Jacobson agreed to the terms and Dahmers possessions were subsequently destroyed and buried in an undisclosed Illinois landfill. 328 In 1994 Lionel published a book A Fathers Story and donated a portion of the proceeds from his book to the victims families. Most of the families showed support for Lionel and Shari although three families subsequently sued Lionel: two for using their names in the book without obtaining prior consent 329 and a third familythat of Steven Hicksfiling a wrongful death suit against Lionel Shari and former wife Joyce citing parental negligence as the cause for the claim. 330 Lionel Dahmer lived with his second wife Shari until her death in January 2023. 331 He died of natural causes on December 5 2023. 332 Both refused to change their surname and professed their love of Dahmer in spite of his crimes. 333 Joyce Flint died of cancer on November 27 2000. Prior to her death she had attempted suicide on at least one occasion. 334 Dahmers younger brother David changed his surname and lives in anonymity. 335 Victims Jeffrey Dahmer killed seventeen young men between 1978 and 1991. Twelve were killed in his North 25th Street apartment. Three victims were murdered and dismembered at his grandmothers West Allis residence. His first and second victims were murdered at his parents home in Ohio and at the Ambassador Hotel in Milwaukee respectively. A total of fourteen of Dahmers victims were from various ethnic minority backgrounds with nine victims being black. Dahmer was adamant that the race of his victims was incidental to him and that it was the body form of a potential victim that attracted his attention. 294 n 22 These contentions have been supported via an independent forensic specialists study of Dahmers victim selection the anthropological analysis of which revealed his victims shared a morphological similarity and suggesting Dahmer was psychologically attracted to a certain anthropometric body type. 338 Most of Dahmers victims were killed by strangulation after being drugged with sedatives. His first victim was killed by a combination of bludgeoning and strangulation and his second victim was battered to death with one further victim killed in 1990 Ernest Miller dying of a combination of shock and blood loss due to his carotid artery being cut. 7 Four of Dahmers victims killed in 1991 had holes bored into their skulls through which Dahmer injected hydrochloric acid or later boiling water into their frontal lobes 339 in an attempt to induce a permanent submissive unresistant state. This proved fatal although on each occasion this was not Dahmers intention. 205 1978 June 18 : Steven Mark Hicks 18. Last seen hitchhiking to a rock concert in Chippewa Lake Park in Bath Ohio. 340 By Dahmers admission Hicks caught his attention because he was bare-chested. Dahmer bludgeoned him with a dumbbell and strangled him to death with this instrument before he dismembered the corpse. He then pulverized Hicks bones with a hammer and scattered them in woodland behind the Dahmer family home. 1987 Steven Walter Tuomi November 20 : Steven Walter Tuomi 25. Killed in a rented room at the Ambassador Hotel in Milwaukee. Dahmer claimed to have no memory of murdering Tuomi yet stated he must have battered him to death in a drunken stupor. His body was dismembered in the basement of Dahmers grandmothers house and the remains discarded in the trash. No remains were ever found. 341 1988 January 16 : James Edward Doxtator 14. Dahmer met him outside a gay bar in Wisconsin and lured him to West Allis on the pretext of paying him 50 to pose for nude pictures. Dahmer strangled Doxtator and kept his body in the basement for a week before dismembering him and discarding the remains in the trash. 342 March 24 : Richard Guerrero 22. Drugged and strangled in Dahmers bedroom at West Allis. Dahmer dismembered Guerreros corpse in the basement dissolved the flesh in acid and disposed of the bones in the trash. He bleached and retained the skull for several months before disposing of it. No remains were ever found. 131 1989 March 25 : Anthony Lee Sears 24. Sears was the last victim whom Dahmer drugged and strangled at his grandmothers residence; he was also the first victim from whom Dahmer permanently retained any body parts. 343 His preserved skull and genitals were found in a filing cabinet at 924 North 25th Street following Dahmers arrest in 1991. 344 1990 May 20 : Raymond Lamont Smith also known as Ricky Beeks 32. 345 The first victim to be killed at Dahmers North 25th Street apartment. Smith was a male sex worker whom Dahmer encountered at a tavern. Dahmer gave Smith a drink laced with sleeping pills then strangled him on his kitchen floor. 152 His skull was spray-painted and retained. June 14 : Edward Warren Smith 27. 346 A known acquaintance of Dahmer who was last seen in his company at a party. 347 Dahmer acidified Smiths skeleton; his skull was destroyed unintentionally when placed in the oven in an effort to remove moisture. No remains were ever found. 348 September 2 : Ernest Marquez Miller 22. Miller was a dance student whom Dahmer encountered outside a bookstore. According to Dahmer he was especially attracted to Millers physique . He was killed by having his carotid artery severed before being dismembered in the bathtub with Dahmer storing his entire skeleton in the bottom drawer of a filing cabinet and his heart liver biceps and portions of his thighs in the freezer for later consumption. 349 September 24 : David Courtney Thomas 22. Encountered Dahmer near the Grand Avenue Mall; he was lured to Dahmers apartment on the promise of money for posing nude. Once a laced drink had rendered Thomas unconscious Dahmer decided he wasnt my type. Nonetheless Dahmer strangled Thomas taking Polaroid photos of the dismemberment process. No remains were ever found. 162 1991 February 18 : Curtis Durrell Straughter 17. Approached by Dahmer as he waited at a bus stop near Marquette University. Dahmer lured Straughter to his apartment where he drugged handcuffed and strangled him before dismembering his body in the bathtub. He retained Straughters skull hands and genitals. 350 April 7 : Errol Lindsey 19. The first victim upon whom Dahmer practiced what he later described to investigators as his drilling technique a procedure in which he drilled holes into the victims skull through which he injected hydrochloric acid into the brain. According to Dahmer Lindsey awoke after this practice after which he was again rendered unconscious with a drink laced with sedatives then strangled to death. Dahmer flayed Lindseys body and retained the skin for several weeks. His skull was found following Dahmers arrest. 350 Tony Anthony Hughes May 24 : Tony Anthony Hughes 31. Hughes was lured by Dahmer to his apartment upon the promise of posing nude for photographs. As Hughes was deaf he and Dahmer communicated using handwritten notes. 350 n 23 The injection of hydrochloric acid into Hughess skull proved fatal. His body was left on Dahmers bedroom floor for three days before being dismembered with Dahmer photographing the dismemberment process. His skull was retained and identified from dental records. 351 May 27 : Konerak Sinthasomphone 14. The younger brother of the boy Dahmer had molested in 1988. Dahmer drugged Sinthasomphone and injected hydrochloric acid into his brain before leaving him unattended as he left the apartment to purchase beer. When he returned he discovered Sinthasomphone naked and disoriented in the street with three distressed young women attempting to assist him. When police arrived Dahmer persuaded them he and Sinthasomphone were lovers and that Sinthasomphone was simply intoxicated. When police left Sinthasomphone with Dahmer in his apartment Dahmer again injected hydrochloric acid into Sinthasomphones brain and this proved fatal. He kept Sinthasomphones head in the freezer and dismembered his body. 201 June 30 : Matt Cleveland Turner 20. On June 30 Dahmer attended the Chicago Pride Parade . At a bus stop he encountered a 20-year-old named Matt Turner and persuaded him to accompany him to Milwaukee to pose for a photo shoot. Turner was drugged strangled and then dismembered in the bathtub. His head and internal organs were put in the freezer and his torso subsequently placed in the 57-gallon drum Dahmer purchased on July 12. 352 July 5 : Jeremiah Benjamin Weinberger 23. Dahmer met him at a gay bar in Chicago and persuaded him to accompany him to Milwaukee for the weekend. Dahmer drilled through Weinbergers skull and injected boiling water into the cavity. He later recalled Weinbergers death to be exceptional as he was the only victim who died with his eyes open. 353 He kept Weinbergers decapitated body in the bathtub for a week before dismembered; his torso was placed in the 57-gallon drum. 354 July 15 : Oliver Joseph Lacy 24. A bodybuilding enthusiast whom Dahmer enticed to his apartment with the promise of money for posing for photographs. Lacy was drugged and strangled with a leather strap before being decapitated with his head and heart being placed in the refrigerator. 354 His skeleton was retained to adorn one side of the private shrine of skulls and skeletons Dahmer was in the process of creating when arrested one week later. July 19 : Joseph Arthur Bradehoft 25. Dahmers last victim. Bradehoft was a father of three children from Minnesota who was looking for work in Milwaukee at the time of his murder. 355 356 Dahmer left Bradehofts body on his bed for two days before on July 21 decapitating it. Dahmer placed Bradehofts head in the refrigerator and his torso in the 57-gallon drum. In media Film The Secret Life: Jeffrey Dahmer was released in 1993. Directed by David Bowen this biographical crime drama stars Carl Crew as Dahmer. 357 The biographical film Dahmer was released in 2002. It stars Jeremy Renner in the title role and co-stars Bruce Davison as Dahmers father Lionel. 358 The drama film Raising Jeffrey Dahmer was released in 2006. Revolving around the reactions of Dahmers parents following his arrest in 1991 Raising Jeffrey Dahmer stars Rusty Sneary as Dahmer and co-stars Scott Cordes as Lionel. 359 In 2012 an independent documentary The Jeffrey Dahmer Files premiered at the South by Southwest festival. It features interviews with Dahmers former neighbor Pamela Bass as well as Detective Patrick Kennedy and the city medical examiner Jeffrey Jentzen. 360 The Marc Meyers directed film My Friend Dahmer premiered at the Tribeca Film Festival on April 25 2017. 361 Based on the graphic novel by John Backderf the film stars Ross Lynch as Dahmer and chronicles his high school years and the events leading up to his first murder. 362 Books Backderf Derf 2012. My Friend Dahmer . New York City: Abrams Books. ISBN 978-1-419-70216-7 . Berry-Dee Christopher 2022. Inside the Mind of Jeffrey Dahmer: The Cannibal Killer . London: Ad Lib Publishers Limited. ISBN 978-1-913-54331-0 . Dahmer Lionel 1994. A Fathers Story . New York: William Morrow and Company . ISBN 978-0-688-12156-3 . Dvorchak Robert J.; Holewa Lisa 1992. Milwaukee Massacre: Jeffrey Dahmer and the Milwaukee Murders . London: Hale Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7090-5003-2 . Ewing Charles Patrick; McCann Joseph T. 2006. Minds on Trial: Great Cases in Law and Psychology . Oxford England: Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-518176-0 . Haycock Dean A. 2014. Murderous Minds: Exploring the Criminal Psychopathic Brain: Neurological Imaging and the Manifestation of Evil . Winnipeg : Pegasus Publications. ISBN 978-1-60598-498-8 . Ratcliff Roy ; Adams Lindy 2006. Dark Journey Deep Grace: Jeffrey Dahmers Story of Faith . Abilene Texas: Leafwood Publishers. ISBN 978-0-9767790-2-5 . Rosewood Jack 2017. Jeffrey Dahmer: A Terrifying True Story of Rape Murder and Cannibalism . Wyoming: LAK Publishing. ISBN 978-1-6484505-5-6 . Television The Trial of Jeffrey Dahmer was released in 1992. Directed by Elkan Allan this documentary largely focuses upon testimony delivered at Dahmers first trial. The documentary concludes with Dahmers addressing Judge Laurence Gram following his conviction. 363 Dahmer: Mystery of a Serial Killer . Directed by Michael Husain and released in November 1993 this 50-minute AE Networks documentary contains archive footage of Dahmers trial in addition to interviews with individuals such as forensic psychiatrist Park Dietz. 364 Inside Edition conducted an interview with Dahmer in January 1993. Conducted by reporter Nancy Glass this 30-minute interview was broadcast in February 1993. 365 ABC News has commissioned a one-hour episode focusing upon Dahmers crimes as part of their television news magazine series Day One . This episode features interviews with forensic psychiatrist Park Dietz and psychiatrist Fred Berlin and was first broadcast in April 1993. 366 Channel 4 has commissioned a documentary focusing on the murders committed by Jeffrey Dahmer. Titled To Kill and Kill Again this 50-minute documentary was first broadcast on December 12 1993. 367 Dateline NBC also broadcast an interview with Dahmer. Conducted by Stone Phillips and first broadcast on March 8 1994 this 90-minute episodetitled Confessions of a Serial Killer features interviews with Dahmer and his father conducted at Columbia Correctional Institution. Dahmers mother is also interviewed for this program. 368 The BBC has broadcast a documentary focusing on the life and crimes of Jeffrey Dahmer. Titled Everyman: Profile of a Serial Killer and directed by Nikki Stockley this 50-minute documentary was first broadcast in November 1994. 369 AE Networks commissioned a second documentary focusing upon the murders committed by Jeffrey Dahmer. Titled Jeffrey Dahmer: The Monster Within this 50-minute episode was first broadcast in June 1996 and contains interviews with Detective Patrick Kennedy and Prosecutor Michael McCann. 370 The British true crime series Born to Kill? broadcast an episode focusing upon Jeffrey Dahmer. This 45-minute episode features interviews with FBI criminal profiler Robert Ressler and Detective Patrick Kennedy and was first broadcast in October 2005. 371 The Investigation Discovery channel broadcast a documentary focusing upon Dahmer within its documentary series Most Evil . This documentary features excerpts of Dahmers 1994 Dateline NBC interview with Stone Phillips and was first broadcast in August 2006. 372 HLN broadcast an episode focusing upon Dahmers crimes as part of its investigative series How it Really Happened . This episode titled The Strange Case of Jeffrey Dahmer originally aired on March 31 2017. 373 The digital cable and satellite television channel Oxygen broadcast the two-part documentary Dahmer on Dahmer: A Serial Killer Speaks in November 2017. Produced and directed by Matthew Watts the program features interviews with among others Dahmers father stepmother former classmates psychiatrists who testified at his trial and a homicide detective involved in the investigation. 374 Poster for the theatrical play Jeffrey Dahmer: Guilty but Insane The Netflix dark tourism documentary series Dark Tourist broadcast an episode which analyzed Dahmers crimes. This 40-minute documentary was first broadcast on July 20 2018. 375 Jeffrey Dahmer: Mind of a Monster was commissioned by the Investigation Discovery channel. This documentary was first broadcast in May 2020 and includes interviews with Dahmers father former neighbors and eyewitnesses in addition to investigators and forensic psychiatrists. 376 Dahmer Monster: The Jeffrey Dahmer Story . A 10-part biographical crime drama series that was commissioned by Netflix and released on September 21 2022. Evan Peters portrayed Dahmer. 377 378 Conversations with a Killer: The Jeffrey Dahmer Tapes . Commissioned by Netflix and directed by Joe Berlinger this series includes previously unreleased recordings of conversations between Dahmer and his attorneys. The first of this three-part series was broadcast on October 7 2022. 379 Theater The Law of Remains 1992 by experimental writer and director Reza Abdoh uses the techniques of Artauds Theatre of Cruelty to depict Dahmers life and crimes. 380 Jeffrey Dahmer: Guilty but Insane 2013. Written and performed by Joshua Hitchens and directed by Ryan Walter. 381 See also Incidents of necrophilia List of homicides in Wisconsin List of incidents of cannibalism List of serial killers by number of victims List of serial killers in the United States Notes Fifteen counts of first-degree intentional homicide in Wisconsin and one count of aggravated murder in Ohio. These convictions were served concurrently in relation to Dahmers September 1988 arrest for drugging and sexually fondling a 13-year-old boy. 2 Several media accounts published following Dahmers arrest reference claims purportedly made by Dahmers father to a parole officer in April 1990 that his older son had been molested by a neighbor at age eight. Lionel would later deny having made such claims and Dahmer would deny having been subjected to any form of sexual abuse . 31 The family had relocated to a rented property in Barberton Ohio prior to moving to Bath Township. 26 In a 2002 paper published in the Journal of Forensic Sciences it has been suggested that Dahmer may have had Asperger syndrome . 41 A September 1992 FBI report on Dahmer indicates he also confessed to engaging in sex with Hicks body prior to dismembering the corpse. 70 Two soldiers have since claimed to have been raped by Dahmer while in the Army. In 2010 one stated that Dahmer had repeatedly raped him over a 17-month period while they were both stationed at Baumholder while another soldier believes Dahmer drugged and raped him inside an armored personnel carrier in 1979. 87 88 However in numerous interviews following his 1991 arrest Dahmer stated to both police and psychiatrists he did not sexually assault or engage in willing homosexual relations while stationed in West Germany. 89 Dahmer also confessed to having committed the same offense on four or five previous occasions. On one occasion Dahmers father observed this box at Dahmers grandmothers house. When he asked Dahmer to open the box Dahmer became defensive and angry claiming the box contained pornographic magazines and stating: Cant I have just one square foot of privacy? He then promised to open the box the following day indicating to his father the box contained pornography. His father acceded to his request. 143 Shortly after moving into 924 North 25th Street Dahmer purchased granite spray-paint from an art store. Having removed all flesh from Sears head he used this substance to spray-paint the skull and Sears genitals. Dahmer also retained Sears scalp. 151 According to a friend of Hughes named Michael Ross Hughes had known Dahmer for a long time prior to his murder. Ross further expounded: Tony and Jeff had had sexual relations. Tony told me so. 176 The witnesses observations regarding blood upon Sinthasomphones testicles and rectum were not corroborated by either the Milwaukee police officers or members of the Milwaukee Fire Department who also arrived at the scene. 191 192 193 The family of Sinthasomphone would later sue the City of Milwaukee and the three police officers alleging violations of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment . These charges were summarily dismissed. 195 Had Balcerzak and Gabrish conducted a background check pertaining to this incident the check would have revealed Dahmer was on probation for the September 1988 sexual assault of a thirteen-year-old boyincidentally Sinthasomphones older brother. 200 Having left Sinthasomphone in the company of Dahmer the patrol unit which had responded to the womens 911 call then radioed their dispatch unit. Above evident laughter from one or more of his colleagues one officer informed his dispatch unit: Intoxicated Asian naked male was returned to his sober boyfriend ... My partner is going to get deloused at the station. 180 202 Dahmer chose to inject boiling water as opposed to hydrochloric acid into Weinbergers skull as three previous attempts to render victims unresistant and submissive via acid injections had been unsuccessful. 206 Dahmer purchased this meat tenderizer after attempting to consume the thigh muscle of one victim and discovering the flesh was so tough he could hardly chew it. 243 The State of Ohio had reinstated the death penalty in 1974; this law had been declared unconstitutional by the time of Hicks 1978 murder. As such Dahmer was not liable to face the death penalty for this offense. Ohio would formally reinstate the death penalty in 1981. 293 Prior to murdering Dahmer and Anderson Scarver had repeatedly expressed extreme racism towards white people. As the majority of Dahmers victims were black and Anderson had attempted to frame two black men for his wifes murder a possibility exists the attacks on both men were racially motivated. 309 310 A 1989 study conducted at the University of Chicago had listed Milwaukee as one of five hypersegregated cities in the United States. 322 Several of Dahmers possessions unrelated to his crimes such as items of furniture were retrieved by his father shortly after Dahmers sentencing. 327 Despite Dahmers insistence the race of his victims was incidental to him some theorize the majority of his murders may have held a racial motive. 336 337 Alternatively his victim selection may have simply been a result of his living in an ethnically mixed area and the demographics of the districts of Milwaukee and Chicago where he typically selected his victims. 41 Hughes was also able to communicate via lip reading . 350 References Citations Lavin Cheryl October 13 1991. Defending Dahmer . Chicago Tribune . Archived from the original on October 11 2022 . Retrieved October 11 2022 . a b Norris 1992 p. 171. Dahmer Autopsy Completed . United Press International . November 29 1994. Archived from the original on April 28 2022 . Retrieved April 28 2022 . Fido 1995 p. 188. Jeffrey Dahmers Inferno . Vanity Fair . November 1 1991. Archived from the original on March 29 2022 . Retrieved April 28 2022 . a b c Masters 1993 p. 136. a b c d Norris 1992 p. 214. Giannangelo 2012 p. 86. Ellens J. Harold 2011. Explaining Evil Volume 1 . Santa Barbara CA: Praeger. p. 181. ISBN 978-0-313-38715-9 . Archived from the original on February 5 2016 . Retrieved January 23 2016 . a b Campbell p. 32. Masters 1993 p. 26. Campbell p. 8. Masters 1993 p. 33. Masters 1993 p. 19. Klotsche Charles 1995. The Silent Victims: The Aftermath of Failed Children on Their Mothers Lives . Los Angeles: Pan American Press. pp. 1920. ISBN 0-9673890-2-X . Martens Willem August 2011. Sadism Linked to Loneliness: Psychodynamic dimensions of the Sadistic Serial killer Jeffrey Dahmer . Psychoanalytic Review . 98 4. New York City: Guilford Press : 493514. doi : 10.1521prev.2011.98.4.493 . ISSN 0033-2836 . PMID 21864144 . Campbell p. 11. a b c Masters 1993 p. 32. Masters 1993 pp. 3239. Norris 1992 pp. 6970. Masters 1993 p. 30. Jeffrey Dahmer . Biography.com . AE Networks . Archived from the original on December 7 2020 . Retrieved June 14 2017 . Norris 1992 p. 61. Norris 1992 pp. 6162. Masters 1993 pp. 3536. a b Masters 1993 p. 34. Dahmer 1994 p. 61. Jeffrey Dahmers Biography: A Child Grows Up to Become a Killer . The Bradenton Herald . August 25 1991. Archived from the original on May 30 2022 . Retrieved May 30 2022 . Davis 1991 p. 20. OConnor William July 28 1991. And So We Ask: Who - and Why - is This Man? . Akron Beacon Journal . Archived from the original on November 14 2022 . Retrieved November 14 2022 . Schwartz 1992 p. 38. Masters 1993 p. 36. He Killed Them So They Wouldnt Leave . Quad City Times . August 11 1991. Archived from the original on November 5 2021 . Retrieved November 5 2021 . a b Masters 1993 p. 45. a b Masters 1993 p. 39. a b Jeffrey Dahmer Biography: The Cannibal Killer . biographics.org . July 13 2018. Archived from the original on March 4 2021 . Retrieved January 22 2021 . Masters 1993 p. 46. Norris 1992 p. 63. Masters 1993 p. 47. Ressler 1997 p. 101. a b Aggrawal 2016 p. 127. Norris 1992 p. 74. Dvorchak Holewa 1992 p. 35. Barron James; Tabor Mary B. W. August 3 1991. Dahmer Spent Years Crying Out For Attention . Tuscaloosa News . pp. 1A 6A. Archived from the original on January 22 2021 . Retrieved August 24 2017 . a b Barron James; Tabor Mary B.W. August 4 1991. 17 Killed and a Life Is Searched for Clues . The New York Times . Archived from the original on June 15 2018 . Retrieved April 30 2018 . Dyer Robert April 30 2016. Playing Tennis with Jeffrey Dahmer . Akron Beacon Journal . Archived from the original on January 27 2023 . Retrieved November 19 2022 . Masters 1993 p. 42. Masters 1993 pp. 4344. Masters 1993 p. 43. a b Masters 1993 pp. 5152. Norris 1992 p. 76. Tron Gina October 27 2017. Everything You Need to Know About Jeffrey Dahmer . Oxygen.com . Archived from the original on September 28 2022 . Retrieved September 28 2022 . Norris 1992 p. 77. Dvorchak Holewa 1992 p. 37. Dahmer 1994 pp. 7679. a b Distress Signals from a Disturbed Life: Abundant Clues but No Simple Answers . The Galveston Daily News . August 12 1991. Archived from the original on October 31 2021 . Retrieved January 23 2023 . Masters 1993 p. 56. Taylor Mary B.W. August 4 1991. Seventeen Killed and a Life Is Searched For Clues . The New York Times . Archived from the original on July 9 2021 . Retrieved March 25 2021 . Masters 1993 p. 57. Norris 1992 p. 100. Masters 1993 p. 62. Norris 1992 p. 83. Masters 1993 p. 61. Norris 1992 p. 93. a b Dvorchak Holewa 1992 p. 40. Taylor Mary B.W. August 12 1991. Sorrow and Frustration On Trails of the Missing . The New York Times . Archived from the original on July 6 2017 . Retrieved July 21 2017 . Masters 1993 p. 66. Purcell Arrigo 2006 p. 77. a b Masters 1993 p. 67. Freedom of Information and Privacy Acts: Subject: Jeffrey Dahmer Part 3 of 19 . Federal Bureau of Investigation . September 11 1992. Archived from the original on September 19 2015 . Retrieved October 6 2022 . Masters 1993 p. 68. Roy 2002 p. 102. Norris 1992 p. 99. Dvorchak Holewa 1992 pp. 4344. Davis 1991 p. 42. Dvorchak Holewa 1992 p. 46. Dahmer Chronicles: A Prom A Seance and A Victim . The Akron Beacon Journal . August 11 1991. Archived from the original on February 19 2022 . Retrieved February 19 2022 . Dahmer 1994 p. 105. Dahmer 1994 pp. 103104. Norris 1992 p. 104. Norris 1992 p. 105. Dahmer 1994 p. 107. Masters 1993 p. 74. Killer Remembered As a Wimp . Deseret News . July 28 1991. Archived from the original on July 9 2021 . Retrieved July 6 2021 . Norris 1992 p. 108. Dahmer 1994 pp. 108109. Usborne David June 28 2013. Soldiers Sexual Abuse and the Serial Killer: The US Militarys Secret Sexual Assaults . The Independent . Archived from the original on October 18 2017 . Retrieved November 4 2017 . Freyd Jennifer; Birrell Pamela 2013. Blind to Betrayal: Why We Fool Ourselves We Arent Being Fooled . Nashville Tennessee: Turner Publishing. p. 40. ISBN 978-0-470-60440-3 . Campbell p. 21. Dahmer 1994 pp. 110111. Masters 1993 p. 78. Did Dahmer Have One More Victim? . The Milwaukee Channel . February 1 2007. Archived from the original on February 22 2012 . Retrieved February 5 2007 . cite web : CS1 maint: unfit URL link Masters 1993 p. 80. Dahmer 1994 p. 114. Norris 1992 p. 125. a b Masters 1993 p. 82. Dahmer 1994 p. 115. Dahmer 1994 p. 117. Dahmer 1994 p. 83. Norris 1992 p. 135. Norris 1992 p. 134. Masters 1993 p. 86. a b Masters 1993 p. 125. Masters 1993 p. 88. Dahmer 1994 pp. 119120. Masters 1993 p. 91. Masters 1993 p. 92. Jeffrey Dahmers Inferno . Vanity Fair . November 1 1991. Archived from the original on May 9 2021 . Retrieved April 24 2021 . Masters 1993 p. 93. Masters 1993 p. 94. Norris 1992 p. 136. Schwartz 1992 p. 96. Masters 1993 p. 97. Dahmer 1994 p. 131. Masters 1993 p. 99. a b Bardsley Marilyn. Jeffrey Dahmer Serial Killer and Cannibal Lust Booze Murder . TruTV.com . TruTV Crime Library. Archived from the original on December 15 2011 . Retrieved July 26 2010 . cite web : CS1 maint: unfit URL link a b c Norris 1992 p. 137. Norris 1992 p. 139. Norris 1992 p. 141. Jeffrey Dahmer: Know About Life and Crimes of the American Serial Killer Whose Gruesome Crimes have Created Worldwide Sensation . News9Live. October 13 2022. Archived from the original on October 22 2022 . Retrieved October 22 2022 . a b Masters 1993 p. 110. a b Masters 1993 p. 111. Norris 1992 p. 142. Hayden Aly November 9 2017. Jeffrey Dahmer Crime Scene Photographs . oxygen.com . Archived from the original on October 17 2022 . Retrieved October 18 2022 . Mendoza Madalyn July 28 2017. A Year After His First Murder Serial Killer Jeffrey Dahmer Moved to San Antonio for Military Training . San Antonio Express-News . Archived from the original on December 7 2022 . Retrieved December 7 2022 . Roy 2002 p. 103. Worthington Rogers January 31 1992. Dahmers Grisly Motivation is Debated . The Chicago Tribune . Archived from the original on May 18 2021 . Retrieved June 18 2021 . Wilson Wilson 2006 pp. 109110. Masters 1993 p. 119. a b Norris 1992 p. 151. a b c Masters 1993 p. 121. Masters 1993 p. 129. Norris 1992 p. 166. Teen Describes Escape from Dahmer . Lodi News-Sentinel . Associated Press . February 8 1992. Archived from the original on January 22 2021 . Retrieved December 5 2013 . McCann Sarah September 29 2022. Ronald Flowers: What Happened to Jeffrey Dahmer Survivor and Where is He Now? . National World . Archived from the original on October 14 2022 . Retrieved October 14 2022 . Dahmer 1994 p. 132. Dahmer 1994 pp. 133135. WI v. Dahmer 1992: Lt. Donald Yockey; Lt. Scott Shaefer Officer Gary Temp . Court TV . January 1 2021. Archived from the original on October 10 2021 . Retrieved October 10 2021 . Masters 1993 p. 131. a b Dvorchak Holewa 1992 p. 63. Masters 1993 p. 134. Bardsley Marilyn. Jeffrey Dahmer Serial Killer and Cannibal More Murders More Arrests . TruTV.com . TruTV Crime Library. Archived from the original on August 31 2009 . Retrieved July 26 2010 . cite web : CS1 maint: unfit URL link Dahmers Dad Subtly Lets Loose Rage in Book . The San Bernardino County Sun . April 17 1994. Archived from the original on July 9 2021 . Retrieved July 4 2021 . Norris 1992 p. 197. Dahmer 1994 p. 138. So Many Dead So Few Answers . Akron Beacon Journal . August 11 1991. Archived from the original on October 22 2022 . Retrieved October 22 2022 . Masters 1993 p. 138. Dahmer 1994 pp. 143144. a b Masters 1993 p. 139. Radcliffe J.R. September 23 2022. Whats Real and Whats Fiction in Netflixs Jeffrey Dahmer Series Monster . Milwaukee Journal Sentinel . Archived from the original on September 23 2022 . Retrieved October 6 2022 . Masters 1993 pp. 139140. a b Masters 1993 p. 141. a b Masters 1993 p. 142. a b Dvorchak Holewa 1992 p. 174. Masters 1993 pp. 142143. Masters 1993 p. 143. Masters 1993 p. 146. Dahmer Offers No Excuses . The Journal Times . February 8 1993. Archived from the original on March 13 2018 . Retrieved February 25 2018 . Masters 1993 pp. 153154. a b Masters 1993 p. 154. Masters 1993 pp. 154155. a b c Norris 1992 p. 217. Masters 1993 p. 153. Schwartz 1992 p. 83. Norris 1992 pp. 209211. Norris 1992 pp. 220221. Gadd Jefferson 2007 p. 92. Bardsley Marilyn. Jeffrey Dahmer Serial Killer and Cannibal The Killing Binge . TruTV.com . TruTV Crime Library. Archived from the original on October 19 2013 . Retrieved July 26 2010 . cite web : CS1 maint: unfit URL link a b Dahmer 1994 p. 211. Purcell Arrigo 2006 p. 81. Aggrawal 2016 p. 128. a b Dahmer: How He was Killed . Killers 6: 40. a b Masters 1993 p. 158. PrudHomme Alex August 5 1991. The Little Flat of Horrors . Time . Meredith Corporation . Archived from the original on September 26 2013 . Retrieved August 19 2012 . Masters 1993 p. 162. Lambe Stacy October 11 2022. Mother of Jeffrey Dahmer Victim Tony Hughes Speaks Out Against Netflix Limited Series . CBS . Archived from the original on November 7 2022 . Retrieved November 8 2022 . Freedom of Information and Privacy Acts: Subject: Jeffrey Dahmer Part 6 of 19 . Federal Bureau of Investigation . August 12 1991. Archived from the original on October 5 2022 . Retrieved October 6 2022 . Worthington Rogers August 2 1991. Could Police Have Saved Young Victim? 911 Tapes Show Officers Were In Dahmers Place Left Teen To Fate . The Seattle Times . Archived from the original on January 28 2021 . Retrieved January 21 2021 . a b Masters 1993 p. 176. a b Norris 1992 p. 235. Masters 1993 p. 177. Dvorchak Holewa 1992 p. 75-76. Imrie Robert July 27 1991. Familys Two Encounters With Dahmer End in Grief . Associated Press. Archived from the original on February 4 2021 . Retrieved January 22 2021 . Stephenson Crocker July 26 1991. 2 Women Say Police Failed to Aid 14-year-old . Milwaukee Sentinel . Archived from the original on April 23 2021 . Retrieved September 22 2022 . Worthington Rogers December 13 1992. After Dahmer: Police Try To Learn . Chicago Tribune . Chicago. Archived from the original on April 17 2021 . Retrieved January 22 2021 . Dahmer Incident Report Reveals Contradictions . Journal Times . August 31 1991. Archived from the original on October 15 2020 . Retrieved April 4 2020 . Davis 1991 p. 7. Walsh Edward August 30 1991. Officers in Dahmer Case Are Cleared . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on January 24 2021 . Retrieved January 24 2021 . Officer Defends Giving Boy Back to Dahmer . The New York Times . August 26 1991. Archived from the original on December 15 2017 . Retrieved December 14 2017 . Officers Tell Jury of Letting Dahmer Keep Boy . The New York Times . February 13 1992. Archived from the original on October 2 2021 . Retrieved October 2 2021 . a b c d Barron James July 27 1991. Milwaukee Police Once Queried Suspect . The New York Times . Archived from the original on September 26 2013 . Retrieved December 5 2013 . Masters 1993 p. 178. a b WI v. Dahmer 1992: Officer Joseph Gabrish Lt. Kenneth Meuler . courttv.com. January 1 2021. Archived from the original on October 2 2021 . Retrieved October 2 2021 . Masters 1993 p. 179. a b Estate of Sinthasomphone v. City of Milwaukee 838 Federal Supplement 1320 1324 E.D. Wis. November 23 1993 archived from the original. Judge Dismisses Key Claim in Lawsuit By Dahmer Victims Family . Associated Press. November 25 1993. Archived from the original on January 23 2021 . Retrieved January 24 2021 . Smith Jerry February 11 1992. Officer Says He Noticed Nothing Unusual About Dahmer . United Press International . Archived from the original on January 20 2021 . Retrieved January 20 2021 . Worthington Rogers February 1 1992. Dahmer Escapee Tells of Close Call . Chicago Tribune . Chicago Illinois: Tronc . Archived from the original on November 12 2020 . Retrieved January 20 2021 . Imrie Robert August 2 1991. Officers Were in Dahmers Apartment . The Times-News . Burlington North Carolina: New Media Investment Group . Associated Press. Archived from the original on January 20 2021 . Retrieved December 5 2013 . Norris 1992 pp. 230231. a b Masters 1993 p. 180. Dvorchak Holewa 1992 p. 79. Masters 1993 p. 182. Norris 1992 pp. 252253. a b c Masters 1993 pp. 188189. Masters 1993 p. 189. a b c d Dvorchak Holewa 1992 p. 181. Norris 1992 p. 254. Masters 1993 p. 190. Masters 1993 p. 184. Masters 1993 p. 185. Dvorchak Holewa 1992 p. 90. Norris 1992 p. 258. Norris 1992 p. 15. a b Masters 1993 p. 192. Davis 1991 p. 151. Worthington Rogers February 1 1992. Dahmer Escapee Tells of Close Call . The Chicago Tribune . Archived from the original on January 29 2022 . Retrieved October 29 2021 . Davis 1991 p. 152. Norris 1992 p. 23. Norris 1992 p. 24. Norris 1992 p. 27. Davis 1991 pp. 153154. a b Masters 1993 p. 2. Davis 1991 p. 154. a b Masters 1993 p. 3. Bardsley Marilyn. Jeffrey Dahmer Serial Killer and Cannibal Exposed! . TruTV.com . TruTV Crime Library. Archived from the original on August 31 2009 . Retrieved July 26 2010 . cite web : CS1 maint: unfit URL link Norris 1992 p. 33. Masters 1993 p. 4. Davis 1991 p. 157. Davis 1991 p. 158. Masters 1993 p. 6. Campbell p. 5. Bardsley Marilyn. Jeffrey Dahmer Serial Killer and Cannibal The Head in the Fridge . TruTV.com . TruTV Crime Library. Archived from the original on January 7 2012 . Retrieved July 26 2010 . cite web : CS1 maint: unfit URL link Limelight . Medicine at Michigan . 11 1. Spring 2009. Archived from the original on August 21 2010 . Retrieved July 22 2016 . cite journal : CS1 maint: unfit URL link Masters 1993 p. 10. a b Imrie Robert January 31 1992. Detectives Detail Dahmer Confession During Killers Sanity Trial With PM: Dahmer Trial . AP News . Archived from the original on January 22 2021 . Retrieved April 23 2021 . Masters 1993 p. 21. a b c Masters 1993 p. 11. The Dahmer Chronicles: A Prom a Seance and a Victim . The Akron Beacon Journal . August 11 1991. Archived from the original on February 19 2022 . Retrieved October 11 2022 . Masters 1993 pp. 109110. a b Masters 1993 p. 159. Masters 1993 p. 161. a b MacDonald 2013 p. 120. Norris 1992 pp. 3435. a b Masters 1993 p. 255. Masters 1993 p. 278. Masters 1993 p. 198. Masters 1993 pp. 120121. a b c d Masters 1993 p. 286. Bones Identified at Dahmer Home . The Victoria Advocate . Victoria Texas: Victoria Advocate Publishing. September 14 1991. Archived from the original on January 22 2021 . Retrieved April 29 2018 . Worthington Rogers August 7 1991. Dahmer Polite In Court As New Charges Are Filed . Chicago Tribune . Chicago Illinois: Tronc . Archived from the original on October 1 2019 . Retrieved April 29 2018 . Dahmer Enters Insanity Plea . The Southeast Missourian . January 14 1992. Archived from the original on April 24 2022 . Retrieved February 19 2021 . a b Dvorchak Holewa 1992 p. 56. Dahmer: Guilty Insane . Reading Eagle . Associated Press. January 13 1992. Archived from the original on July 15 2022 . Retrieved December 5 2013 via Google News. Dahmer 1994 pp. 209210. Dahmer 1994 p. 207. Dvorchak Holewa 1992 pp. 169173. Masters 1993 p. 227. a b c Masters 1993 p. 215. Norris 1992 p. 269. Masters 1993 pp. 227228. Expert Findds Few Clues in Dahmer Temple . The Chicago Tribune . February 5 1992. Archived from the original on April 16 2022 . Retrieved July 7 2021 . Petherick Turvey Ferguson 2009 p. 487. Bogira Steve August 27 1992. The Inner Life of a Psycho Killer . Chicago Reader . Archived from the original on October 24 2013 . Retrieved December 5 2013 . Ewing McCann 2006 pp. 142 147151. Worthington Rogers February 9 1992. Psychiatrist: Dahmer in Control . Chicago Tribune . Archived from the original on October 23 2022 . Retrieved October 23 2022 . Psychiatrist Says Dahmer Was Sick but Not Insane . Deseret News . February 10 1992. Archived from the original on October 1 2019 . Retrieved September 10 2010 via Google News. a b Masters 1993 p. 262. Reznek Lawrie 1997. Evil or Ill? Justifying the Insanity Defence . Routledge . p. 290. ISBN 9780415167000 . Archived from the original on January 22 2021 . Retrieved January 22 2021 . Stingl Jim February 12 1992. Dahmer Knew What He Was Doing Expert Says . The Milwaukee Journal . Retrieved December 5 2013 via Google News . permanent dead link Smith Jerry February 12 1992. Psychiatrist Says Dahmer Needed Alcohol Before He Could Kill . United Press International . Archived from the original on November 12 2020 . Retrieved January 22 2021 . Dietz Park 1992. Jeffrey Dahmer Return of the Jedi and Exorcist 3 . Archived from the original on October 28 2021 . Retrieved June 23 2019 . Haycock 2014 pp. 133134. Dickinson Christopher August 27 1992. The Inner Life of a Psychopathic Killer . The Chicago Reader . Archived from the original on September 17 2021 . Retrieved September 17 2021 . Ewing McCann 2006 p. 151. Fulero Solomon M.; Wrightsman Lawrence Samuel 2008. Forensic Psychology . Boston Massachusetts: Cengage Learning. ISBN 978-0-495-50649-2 . Dahmer Sane Psychologist Says . The Pittsburgh Press . February 6 1992. Archived from the original on April 24 2022 . Retrieved October 22 2020 . Masters 1993 p. 268. a b c Jury Deliberates Sanity of Dahmer . The New York Times . February 15 1992. Archived from the original on January 16 2018 . Retrieved January 22 2021 . Defense Claims Dahmer Was a Killing Machine . The New York Times . February 15 1992. Archived from the original on January 22 2021 . Retrieved October 22 2020 . Masters 1993 p. 269. Worthington Rogers February 10 1992. Dahmer Case Comes Down to Will Vs. Impulse . Chicago Tribune . Archived from the original on November 26 2021 . Retrieved January 22 2021 . Walsh Edward February 1 1992. Man Describes Hours-long Ordeal Before Police Apprehended Dahmer . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on January 22 2021 . Retrieved January 22 2021 . Masters 1993 p. 272. Masters 1993 p. 273. a b Dahmer Tells Judge he Blames Nobody But Himself: Dahmer Sentencing . Associated Press News . February 17 1992. Archived from the original on June 6 2021 . Retrieved June 6 2021 . a b Masters 1993 p. 274. Urquhart Sidney May 18 1992. Guilty! Call My Agent! . Time . Archived from the original on October 1 2019. Bardsley Marilyn. Jeffrey Dahmer Serial Killer and Cannibal End of the Road . TruTV.com . TruTV Crime Library. Archived from the original on May 19 2011 . Retrieved July 26 2010 . cite web : CS1 maint: unfit URL link Dahmer 1994 p. 241. Kropko M. R. May 2 1992. Dahmer Gets 16th Life Sentence . Times Daily . Florence Alabama. Archived from the original on January 22 2021 . Retrieved April 29 2018 via Google News. Dahmer Pleads Guilty to 16th Murder . St. Petersburg Times . May 2 1992. Archived from the original on January 22 2021 . Retrieved December 5 2013 via Google News. Death Penalty Information Center: Ohio . deathpenaltyinfo.org. Archived from the original on February 26 2024 . Retrieved February 2 2024 . a b Campbell p. 36. Serial Killer Dahmer Collects 12 000 from Pen Pals . Associated Press . March 6 1994. Archived from the original on November 7 2022 . Retrieved November 7 2022 . a b c Campbell p. 37. Jeffrey Dahmers Killer Explains Why He Did It . ABC7 Chicago . April 30 2015. Archived from the original on March 13 2018 . Retrieved July 21 2017 . Toushin 2006 p. 499. Full King Interview Dahmer Parents Lionel and Shari . June 28 2014. Archived from the original on October 28 2021 via YouTube. a b Drexler Michael; Sangiacomo Michaela December 15 1995. Dahmers Last Obsession . The Jackson Sun . Archived from the original on November 20 2022 . Retrieved November 20 2022 . Dahmer Found Religion Played Pranks in Prison . The Beaver County Times . Associated Press. November 28 1994. Archived from the original on January 22 2021 . Retrieved December 5 2013 via Google News. Bardsley Marilyn. Jeffrey Dahmer Serial Killer and Cannibal Did Dahmer Find God? . TruTV.com . TruTV Crime Library. Archived from the original on September 4 2009 . Retrieved July 26 2010 . cite web : CS1 maint: unfit URL link a b c d Gleick Elizabeth December 12 1994. The Final Victim . People . Vol. 42 no. 24. Archived from the original on March 12 2017 . Retrieved July 4 2014 . Ratcliff Roy; Adams Lindy September 11 2015. Dark Journey Deep Grace: Jeffrey Dahmers Story of Faith . Abilene Texas: Leafwood Publishers. p. 57. ISBN 978-0-89112-891-5 . Durruthy: The Road to Success was Far from Easy . Umoja Magazine . April 3 2020. Archived from the original on August 25 2021 . Retrieved August 25 2021 . Wisconsin Inmate Held in Slaying of Dahmer . Deseret News . Salt Lake City Utah: Deseret News Publishing Company . Associated Press . November 29 1994. Archived from the original on October 1 2019 . Retrieved July 4 2014 . Dahmer Against Protection . The Canberra Times . December 1 1994. Archived from the original on October 19 2022 . Retrieved October 19 2022 . Masters 1993 p. 87. a b c Terry Don November 29 1994. Jeffrey Dahmer Multiple Killer Is Bludgeoned to Death in Prison . The New York Times . Archived from the original on August 21 2014 . Retrieved July 4 2014 . a b Inmate Bludgeoned with Dahmer on Work Detail Dies . The New York Times . December 1 1994. Archived from the original on January 25 2014 . Retrieved August 31 2020 . Dahmer Killer Charged . Time . Meredith Corporation . December 15 1994. Archived from the original on October 1 2019 . Retrieved October 1 2019 . Aggrawal 2016 p. 129. a b Inmate: Dahmer Killed for God . Star-News . Wilmington North Carolina: GateHouse Media . Associated Press. December 16 1994. Archived from the original on January 22 2021 . Retrieved April 29 2018 . Buelow Michael C. December 16 1994. Bar From Weight Room Used to Kill Dahmer . Herald Journal . Logan Utah: Adams Publishing Group . Archived from the original on January 22 2021 . Retrieved April 29 2018 via Google News . Janz William November 29 1994. It Doesnt Matter Mom Dahmer Said . Milwaukee Journal . Milwaukee Wisconsin: Gannett Company . Archived from the original on July 14 2014 . Retrieved December 5 2013 . Jeffrey Dahmers Killer Gets 2 Life Sentences . Daily News . Vol. 24 no. 70. Kingsport Tennessee: Sandusky Newspaper Group. Reuters . May 17 1995. p. 11. Archived from the original on January 22 2021 . Retrieved December 5 2013 . Body of Wisconsin Serial Killer Is Cremated . The New York Times . Associated Press. September 18 1995. Archived from the original on November 13 2013 . Retrieved December 5 2013 . Dahmer Cremated . The Vindicator . Youngstown Ohio. September 18 1995. p. A3. Archived from the original on January 22 2021 . Retrieved December 5 2013 . Theimer Sharon September 17 1995. Dahmers Remains Cremated Except for Brain . Associated Press. Archived from the original on November 11 2022 . Retrieved November 11 2022 . Shennan Rhona October 14 2022. Jeffrey Dahmer Autopsy: What Happened to Serial Killers Brain After Death Was it Studied by Scientists? . National World . Archived from the original on February 7 2023 . Retrieved February 7 2023 . Sherrill Martha August 7 1991. City in The Grip of Fear . Washington Post . Archived from the original on November 14 2017 . Retrieved November 13 2017 . a b Walters Laurel Shaper August 16 1991. Dahmer Case Unleashes Black Anger in Milwaukee . Christian Science Monitor . ISSN 0882-7729 . Archived from the original on October 5 2022 . Retrieved August 8 2022 . a b Powers Joy June 26 2020. How Did Jeffrey Dahmer Harm Milwaukees Gay Community? . WUWM . Archived from the original on August 15 2022 . Retrieved August 8 2022 . Dahmer Apartment Demolition Begins . The Bulletin . Associated Press . November 17 1992. Archived from the original on January 22 2021 . Retrieved December 5 2013 . Serial killers Property Set to Go on The Auction Block . CNN . May 8 1996. Archived from the original on October 14 2012 . Retrieved November 24 2018 . Johnson Dirk May 20 1996. Bid to Auction Killers Tools Provokes Disgust . The New York Times . Archived from the original on November 11 2012 . Retrieved November 24 2018 . Dahmer 1994 p. 249. Dahmer Belongings Destroyed . Lawrence Journal-World . June 28 1996. Archived from the original on November 22 2021 . Retrieved November 24 2018 via Google News . Families of 2 Victims Sue Dahmers Father over Book . Orlando Sentinel . March 5 1994. Archived from the original on October 1 2019 . Retrieved July 21 2017 . Victims Mother Seeks 50 Million from Dahmers . Associated Press. August 29 1992. Archived from the original on October 1 2019 . Retrieved October 1 2019 . Land Olivia January 17 2023. Jeffrey Dahmers Stepmother Shari Dead at 81 . The New York Post. Archived from the original on January 26 2023 . Retrieved January 26 2023 . Traub Alex December 12 2023. Lionel Dahmer Who Agonized About Raising a Serial Killer Dies at 87 . The New York Times . Archived from the original on December 16 2023 . Retrieved December 16 2023 . Price Mark J. December 5 2023. Jeffrey Dahmers Father Lionel Dies at 87 in Medina County . Akron Beacon Journal. Archived from the original on December 6 2023 . Retrieved December 7 2023 . Joyce Flint; Serial Killer Jeffrey Dahmers Mother . Los Angeles Times . December 6 2000. Archived from the original on October 1 2019 . Retrieved May 20 2017 . Campbell p. 14. Asante 2003 p. 243. Twentieth-Century Murder ISBN 978-1-858-91390-2 p. 119 Jentzen J. M. September 1 2017. Micro Disasters: The Case of Serial Killer Jeffrey Dahmer . Academic Forensic Pathology . 7 3. Thousand Oaks California: SAGE Publications : 444452. doi : 10.239072017.037 . PMC 6474573 . PMID 31239993 . Masters 1993 pp. 176177. Norris 1992 p. 89. Dahmer Responsible for Sixteen Deaths . Green Bay Press-Gazette . July 15 2001. Archived from the original on September 26 2022 . Retrieved September 26 2022 . Rosen Marty; Washington Kevin August 23 1991. Dahmer Charged in Death of Bay Area Womans Son . Tampa Bay Times . Archived from the original on February 16 2024 . Retrieved February 17 2024 . Dahmer Charged in Eight Deaths . Sun Journal . August 7 1991. Archived from the original on November 3 2021 . Retrieved December 5 2013 . Masters 1993 p. 7. Jeffrey Dahmers Inferno . Vanity Fair . November 1991. Archived from the original on September 23 2020 . Retrieved July 19 2019 . Dvorchak Holewa 1992 p. 175. Norris 1992 pp. 199200. Masters 1993 p. 144. Masters 1993 p. 155. a b c d Masters 1993 p. 13. Dvorchak Holewa 1992 p. 178. Masters 1993 p. 183. Masters 1993 p. 49. a b Masters 1993 p. 14. Dvorchak Robert July 28 1991. Families Struggle to Understand How Their Loved Ones Fell Prey . Associated Press News . Archived from the original on January 22 2021 . Retrieved January 22 2021 . Gauen Patrick E. July 26 1991. Killers Victim Recalled as Trusting and Helpful . St. Louis Post-Dispatch . Archived from the original on October 19 2022 . Retrieved October 19 2022 . Filmography: Carl Crew . British Film Institute . Archived from the original on February 13 2023 . Retrieved February 13 2023 . Starkey Arun October 27 2022. Revisiting Jeremy Renners Portrayal of Jeffrey Dahmer . Far Out . Archived from the original on February 12 2023 . Retrieved February 12 2023 . Raising Jeffrey Dahmer: Full Cast Crew . tvguide.com. Archived from the original on February 13 2023 . Retrieved February 13 2023 . Jeff explores Dahmers effect on Milwaukee Archived May 5 2019 at the Wayback Machine Los Angeles Times . March 10 2012. Gleiberman Owen April 27 2017. Tribeca Film Review: My Friend Dahmer . Variety . Archived from the original on June 26 2017 . Retrieved June 21 2017 . Collis Clark May 15 2017. Ross Lynch Starring Serial Killer Film My Friend Dahmer to be Released This Fall . Entertainment Weekly . New York City: Meredith Corporation . Archived from the original on May 5 2019 . Retrieved October 1 2019 . The Trial of Jeffrey Dahmer: Serial Killer . radiotimes.com. Archived from the original on February 11 2023 . Retrieved February 11 2023 . Dahmer: Mystery of a Serial Killer . imdb.com . Archived from the original on January 9 2022 . Retrieved January 9 2022 . Dahmer Interview to Air on Inside Edition . United Press International . February 4 1993. Archived from the original on November 23 2021 . Retrieved November 23 2021 . ABC Alters News Mag Formula with Day One . Variety . March 2 1993. Archived from the original on February 8 2022 . Retrieved February 8 2022 . British Universities Film and Video Council: To Kill and Kill Again . bufvc.ac.uk . June 3 2016. Archived from the original on November 27 2021 . Retrieved November 27 2021 . Confessions of a Serial Killer . Radio Times . Archived from the original on February 13 2023 . Retrieved February 13 2022 . Everyman: Profile of a Serial Killer . bbc.co.uk . January 2 2021. Archived from the original on November 25 2021 . Retrieved November 25 2021 . Jeffrey Dahmer: The Monster Within . imdb.com . Archived from the original on January 8 2022 . Retrieved January 8 2022 . Born to Kill?: Jeffrey Dahmer . imdb.com . Archived from the original on November 25 2021 . Retrieved November 25 2021 . Deadly Desires . imdb.com . Archived from the original on October 2 2022 . Retrieved February 13 2022 . The Strange Case of Jeffrey Dahmer . CNN. March 31 2017. Archived from the original on April 3 2017 . Retrieved April 3 2017 . Dahmer On Dahmer: A Serial Killer Speaks . Archived from the original on February 11 2023 . Retrieved February 11 2023 via discoveryuk.com. Netflix Travel Show Dark Tourist Isnt Worth the Trip . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on September 26 2018 . Retrieved September 26 2018 . Jeffrey Dahmer: Mind of a Monster . Discovery.com . Archived from the original on October 28 2020 . Retrieved May 31 2020 . VanHoose Benjamin June 9 2021. Evan Peters Transforms into Serial Killer Jeffrey Dahmer in First Set Photo from Upcoming Series . People . Archived from the original on January 14 2022 . Retrieved January 14 2022 . Zee Michaela September 16 2022. Monster Trailer: Evan Peters Embodies Jeffrey Dahmer in Ryan Murphys Latest Netflix Series . Variety . Archived from the original on September 16 2022 . Retrieved September 16 2022 . Lambe Stacy October 7 2022. Jeffrey Dahmers Lawyer Recounts Spending Hours Interviewing the Serial Killer: I Had Nightmares . Entertainment Tonight . Archived from the original on October 7 2022 . Retrieved October 7 2022 . Schildcrout Jordan 2014. Murder Most Queer: The Homicidal Homosexual in the American Theater . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. pp. 159163. ISBN 978-0-472-05232-5 . Jeffrey Dahmer Guilty but Insane Trailer . briansiano.com . 2013. Archived from the original on June 10 2020 . Retrieved June 10 2020 . Print sources Aggrawal Anil 2016. Necrophilia: Forensic and Medico-legal Aspects . Boca Raton Florida: CRC Press . ISBN 978-1-4200-8913-4 . Asante Molefi 2003. Erasing Racism: The Survival of the American Nation . New York: Prometheus Books. ISBN 978-1-615-92527-8 . Campbell Duncan ed.. Murder in Mind Jeffrey Dahmer the Milwaukee serial killer . Murder in Mind 5. London England: Marshall Cavendish . ISSN 1364-5803 . Dahmer Lionel 1994. A Fathers Story . New York City: William Morrow . ISBN 978-0-688-12156-3 . Davis Don 1991. The Jeffrey Dahmer Story: An American Nightmare . New York City: Macmillan . ISBN 978-0-312-92840-7 . Dvorchak Robert J.; Holewa Lisa 1992. Milwaukee Massacre: Jeffrey Dahmer and the Milwaukee Murders . New York City: Dell Publishing . ISBN 978-0-7090-5003-2 . Archived from the original on April 12 2023 . Retrieved March 21 2023 . Ewing Charles Patrick; McCann Joseph T. 2006. Minds on Trial: Great Cases in Law and Psychology . Oxford England: Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-518176-0 . Fido Martin 1995. Twentieth-Century Murder . London: Bracken. ISBN 978-1-858-91390-2 . Gadd David; Jefferson Tony 2007. Psychosocial Criminology: An Introduction . London: Sage Publishing. ISBN 978-1-446-23482-2 . Giannangelo Stephen J. 2012. Real-Life Monsters: A Psychological Examination of the Serial Murderer . Santa Barbara California: ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0-313-39784-4 . Haycock Dean A. 2014. Murderous Minds: Exploring the Criminal Psychopathic Brain: Neurological Imaging and the Manifestation of Evil . New York City: Pegasus Books. ISBN 978-1-60598-498-8 . MacDonald Alzena 2013. Murders and Acquisitions: Representations of the Serial Killer in Popular Culture . New York: Bloomsbury Books. ISBN 978-1-441-17702-5 . Masters Brian 1993. The Shrine of Jeffrey Dahmer . London England: Hodder Stoughton . ISBN 978-0-340-59194-9 . Norris Joel 1992. Jeffrey Dahmer . London England: Constable Robinson . ISBN 978-0-09-472060-2 . Archived from the original on April 12 2023 . Retrieved March 22 2023 . Petherick Wayne; Turvey Brent E.; Ferguson Claire E. 2009. Forensic Criminology . Amsterdam: Elsevier . ISBN 978-0-123-75071-6 . Purcell Catherine; Arrigo Bruce 2006. The Psychology of Lust Murder: Paraphilia Sexual Killing and Sexual Homicide . Amsterdam: Elsevier . ISBN 978-0-123-70510-5 . Ratcliff Roy; Adams Lindy 2006. Dark Journey Deep Grace: Jeffrey Dahmers Story of Faith . Abilene Texas: Leafwood Publishing . ISBN 978-0-9767790-2-5 . Ressler Robert ; Shachtman Tom 1997. I Have Lived in the Monster: A Report from the Abyss . New York City: St. Martins Press . ISBN 978-0-312-15552-0 . Roy Jody M. 2002. Love to Hate: Americas Obsession with Hatred and Violence . New York City: Columbia University Press . ISBN 978-0-231-12569-7 . Schwartz Anne E. 1992. The Man Who Could Not Kill Enough . New York City: Citadel . ISBN 978-1-55972-117-2 . cite book : CS1 maint: ref duplicates default link Toushin Steven 2006. The Destruction of the Moral Fabric of America . London: Wells Street Publishing. ISBN 978-1-884-76004-4 . cite book : CS1 maint: ref duplicates default link Wilson Colin ; Wilson Damon 2006. The Worlds Most Evil Murderers: Real-Life Stories of Infamous Killers . Bath England: Parragon Books Ltd . ISBN 978-1-405-48828-0 . Further reading Blundell Nigel 1996. Encyclopedia of Serial Killers . PRC Publishing. ISBN 978-1-85648-328-5 . Lane Brian; Gregg Wilfred 1992. The Encyclopedia of Serial Killers . Headline. ISBN 978-0-7472-3731-0 . Mann Robert; Williamson Miryam 2007. Forensic Detective: How I Cracked the Worlds Toughest Cases . Random House of Canada. ISBN 978-0-345-47942-6 . Pincus Jonathan 2002. Base Instincts: What Makes Killers Kill? . W. W. Norton Company. ISBN 978-0-393-32323-8 . Ressler Robert; Schactman Tom 1992. Whoever Fights Monsters: My Twenty Years Hunting Serial Killers for the FBI . St. Martins Press. ISBN 0-312-95044-6 . External links Jeffrey Dahmer at Wikipedias sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Excerpts of Jeffrey Dahmers confession Archived September 10 2019 at the Wayback Machine WI v. Dahmer 1992 : A Court TV website detailing the first of Dahmers 1992 murder trials Contemporary news article Archived January 24 2021 at the Wayback Machine pertaining to the trial of Jeffrey Dahmer CNN interview Archived April 4 2013 at the Wayback Machine with Lionel and Shari Dahmer Loneliness and Associated Violent Antisocial Behavior: Analysis of the Case Reports of Jeffrey Dahmer and Dennis Nilsen Archived October 30 2020 at the Wayback Machine as published by the United States National Library of Medicine 1993 CBS Interview of Jeffrey Dahmer on YouTube Jeffrey Dahmer at IMDb v t e Jeffrey Dahmer Cultural depictions Books A Fathers Story 1994 My Friend Dahmer 2012 Films The Secret Life: Jeffrey Dahmer 1993 Dahmer 2002 Raising Jeffrey Dahmer 2006 Dahmer vs. Gacy 2010 The Jeffrey Dahmer Files 2012 My Friend Dahmer 2017 Television Hell on Earth 2006 2006 Conversations with a Killer: The Jeffrey Dahmer Tapes 2022 Dahmer Monster: The Jeffrey Dahmer Story 2022 Related Lionel Dahmer father Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Sweden Israel Artists MusicBrainz Other IdRef SNAC Retrieved from https:en.wikipedia.orgwindex.php?titleJeffreyDahmeroldid1250292155 Categories : 1960 births 1978 murders in the United States 1987 murders in the United States 1988 murders in the United States 1989 murders in the United States 1990 murders in the United States 1991 murders in the United States 1994 deaths 1994 murders in the United States 20th-century American criminals 20th-century American LGBTQ people American cannibals American gay men American LGBTQ military personnel American male criminals American murder victims American murderers of children American people convicted of child sexual abuse American people convicted of murder American people convicted of sexual assault American people of German descent American people of Irish descent American people of Norwegian descent American people of Welsh descent American people who died in prison custody American prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment Child abuse incidents and cases Child sexual abuse in the United States Crime in Milwaukee Deaths by beating in the United States Former Lutherans Gay military personnel Human trophy collecting Incidents of cannibalism Incidents of violence against boys Jeffrey Dahmer LGBTQ Christians LGBTQ people from Wisconsin Military personnel from Milwaukee Murder convictions without a body Murder in Ohio Murder in Wisconsin Necrophiles Ohio State University Fisher College of Business alumni People convicted of murder by Ohio People convicted of murder by Wisconsin People extradited within the United States People from Bath Township Summit County Ohio People from Doylestown Ohio People from Milwaukee People murdered in Wisconsin People with borderline personality disorder People with schizoid personality disorder People with schizotypal personality disorder People with psychotic disorder Prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment by Wisconsin Prisoners who died in Wisconsin detention Serial killers from Ohio Serial killers from Wisconsin Serial killers murdered in prison custody United States Army soldiers Violence against men in North America Hidden categories: CS1 maint: unfit URL Pages using cite court with unknown parameters All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use American English from October 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from October 2022 Articles with hCards CS1 maint: ref duplicates default This page was last edited on 9 October 2024 at 15:21 UTC . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view