John Lennon - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Donate Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 1 Early years: 19401956 2 The Quarrymen to the Beatles: 19561970 Toggle The Quarrymen to the Beatles: 19561970 subsection 2.1 Formation fame and touring: 19561966 2.2 Studio years break-up and solo work: 19661970 3 Solo career: 19701980 Toggle Solo career: 19701980 subsection 3.1 Initial solo success and activism: 19701972 3.2 Lost weekend : 19731975 3.3 Hiatus and return: 19751980 4 Murder 5 Personal relationships Toggle Personal relationships subsection 5.1 Cynthia Lennon 5.2 Brian Epstein 5.3 Julian Lennon 5.4 Yoko Ono 5.5 May Pang 5.6 Sean Lennon 5.7 Former Beatles 6 Political activism Toggle Political activism subsection 6.1 Deportation attempt 6.2 FBI surveillance and declassified documents 7 Writing 8 Art 9 Musicianship Toggle Musicianship subsection 9.1 Instruments 9.2 Vocal style 10 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 10.1 Accolades 11 Discography Toggle Discography subsection 11.1 Studio albums 11.2 Experimental studio albums with Yoko Ono 12 Filmography Toggle Filmography subsection 12.1 Film 12.2 Television 13 Bibliography 14 See also 15 Notes 16 References Toggle References subsection 16.1 Citations 16.2 Sources 17 Further reading 18 External links Toggle the table of contents John Lennon 137 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch Anaraskiela Aragones Asturianu Avanee Aymar aru Azrbaycanca Basa Bali Ban-lam-gu Bislama Bosanski Brezhoneg Catala Cestina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Emilian e rumagnol Espanol Esperanto Euskara Froyskt Francais Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gaidhlig Galego Goychi Konknni Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua IsiZulu Islenska Italiano Jawa Kapampangan Kiswahili Kongo Kurdi Latina Latviesu Letzebuergesch Lietuviu Ligure Lombard Magyar Malagasy Bahasa Melayu Mirandes Nahuatl Nederlands Norsk bokmal Norsk nynorsk Occitan Ozbekcha Pangasinan Pangcah Papiamentu Piemonteis Plattduutsch Polski Portugues Romana Runa Simi Sardu Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovencina Slovenscina Slunski srpski Srpskohrvatski Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog tatarca Turkce Tieng Viet Volapuk Winaray Yoruba Zazaki Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia English musician and member of the Beatles 19401980 Lennon redirects here. For other uses see Lennon disambiguation and John Lennon disambiguation . John Lennon Lennon in 1973 Born John Winston Lennon 1940-10-09 9 October 1940 Liverpool England Died 8 December 1980 1980-12-08 aged 40 New York City US Cause of death Murder by shooting Resting place Cremated; ashes scattered in Central Park New York City Other names John Winston Ono Lennon Occupations Singer songwriter musician author artist 1 peace activist Years active 19561980 Spouses Cynthia Powell m. 1962 ; div. 1968 Yoko Ono m. 1969 Partner May Pang 19731975 Children Julian Sean Parents Alfred Lennon father Julia Stanley mother Relatives Julia Baird half-sister Mimi Smith aunt Musical career Genres Rock pop experimental Instruments Vocals guitar keyboards harmonica Labels Parlophone Capitol Apple Geffen Polydor Formerly of The Quarrymen The Beatles The Dirty Mac Plastic Ono Band Musical artist Website johnlennon .com Signature John Winston Ono Lennon nb 1 born John Winston Lennon ; 9 October 1940 8 December 1980 was an English singer songwriter and musician. He gained worldwide fame as the founder co-lead vocalist and rhythm guitarist of the Beatles . His work included music writing drawings and film. His songwriting partnership with Paul McCartney remains the most successful in history as the primary songwriters in the Beatles. 3 Born in Liverpool Lennon became involved in the skiffle craze as a teenager. In 1956 he formed the Quarrymen which evolved into the Beatles in 1960. Sometimes called the smart Beatle Lennon initially was the groups de facto leader a role he gradually seemed to cede to McCartney. Through his songwriting in the Beatles he embraced myriad musical influences initially writing and co-writing rock and pop-oriented hit songs in the bands early years then later incorporating experimental elements into his compositions in the latter half of the Beatles career as his songs became known for their increasing innovation. Lennon soon expanded his work into other media by participating in numerous films including How I Won the War and authoring In His Own Write and A Spaniard in the Works both collections of nonsense writings and line drawings. Starting with All You Need Is Love his songs were adopted as anthems by the anti-war movement and the larger counterculture of the 1960s . In 1969 he started the Plastic Ono Band with his second wife multimedia artist Yoko Ono held the two-week-long anti-war demonstration bed-in for peace and left the Beatles to embark on a solo career. Lennon and Ono collaborated on many works including a trilogy of avant-garde albums and several more films. After the Beatles disbanded Lennon released his solo debut John LennonPlastic Ono Band and the international top-10 singles Give Peace a Chance Instant Karma! Imagine and Happy Xmas War Is Over . Moving to New York City in 1971 his criticism of the Vietnam War resulted in a three-year deportation attempt by the Nixon administration . Lennon and Ono separated from 1973 to 1975 during which time he produced Harry Nilsson s album Pussy Cats . He also had chart-topping collaborations with Elton John Whatever Gets You thru the Night and David Bowie Fame . Following a five-year hiatus Lennon returned to music in 1980 with the Ono collaboration Double Fantasy . He was murdered by Mark David Chapman three weeks after the albums release. As a performer writer or co-writer Lennon had 25 number-one singles in the Billboard Hot 100 chart. Double Fantasy his second-best-selling non-Beatles album won the 1981 Grammy Award for Album of the Year . 4 That year he won the Brit Award for Outstanding Contribution to Music . In 2002 Lennon was voted eighth in a BBC history poll of the 100 Greatest Britons . Rolling Stone ranked him the fifth-greatest singer and 38th greatest artist of all time . He was inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1997 and the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame twice as a member of the Beatles in 1988 and as a solo artist in 1994. Early years: 19401956 Lennons home at 251 Menlove Avenue John Winston Lennon was born on 9 October 1940 at Liverpool Maternity Hospital the only child of Julia nee Stanley 19141958 and Alfred Lennon 19121976. Alfred was a merchant seaman of Irish descent who was away at the time of his sons birth. 5 His parents named him John Winston Lennon after his paternal grandfather John Jack Lennon and Prime Minister Winston Churchill . 6 His father was often away from home but sent regular pay cheques to 9 Newcastle Road Liverpool where Lennon lived with his mother; 7 the cheques stopped when he went absent without leave in February 1944. 8 9 When he eventually came home six months later he offered to look after the family but Julia by then pregnant with another mans child rejected the idea. 10 After her sister Mimi complained to Liverpools Social Services twice Julia gave her custody of Lennon. In July 1946 Lennons father visited her and took his son to Blackpool secretly intending to emigrate to New Zealand with him. 11 Julia followed them with her partner at the time Bobby Dykins and after a heated argument his father forced the five-year-old to choose between them. In one account of this incident Lennon twice chose his father but as his mother walked away he began to cry and followed her. 12 According to author Mark Lewisohn however Lennons parents agreed that Julia should take him and give him a home. Billy Hall who witnessed the incident has said that the dramatic portrayal of a young John Lennon being forced to make a decision between his parents is inaccurate. 13 Lennon had no further contact with Alf for close to 20 years. 14 Throughout the rest of his childhood and adolescence Lennon lived at Mendips 251 Menlove Avenue Woolton with Mimi and her husband George Toogood Smith who had no children of their own. 15 His aunt purchased volumes of short stories for him and his uncle a dairyman at his familys farm bought him a mouth organ and engaged him in solving crossword puzzles. 16 Julia visited Mendips on a regular basis and John often visited her at 1 Blomfield Road Liverpool where she played him Elvis Presley records taught him the banjo and showed him how to play Aint That a Shame by Fats Domino . 17 In September 1980 Lennon commented about his family and his rebellious nature: A part of me would like to be accepted by all facets of society and not be this loudmouthed lunatic poetmusician. But I cannot be what I am not ... I was the one who all the other boys parents including Pauls father would say Keep away from him ... The parents instinctively recognised I was a troublemaker meaning I did not conform and I would influence their children which I did. I did my best to disrupt every friends home ... Partly out of envy that I didnt have this so-called home ... but I did ... There were five women that were my family. Five strong intelligent beautiful women five sisters. One happened to be my mother. She just couldnt deal with life. She was the youngest and she had a husband who ran away to sea and the war was on and she couldnt cope with me and I ended up living with her elder sister. Now those women were fantastic ... And that was my first feminist education ... I would infiltrate the other boys minds. I could say Parents are not gods because I dont live with mine and therefore I know. 18 He regularly visited his cousin Stanley Parkes who lived in Fleetwood and took him on trips to local cinemas. 19 During the school holidays Parkes often visited Lennon with Leila Harvey another cousin and the three often travelled to Blackpool two or three times a week to watch shows. They would visit the Blackpool Tower Circus and see artists such as Dickie Valentine Arthur Askey Max Bygraves and Joe Loss with Parkes recalling that Lennon particularly liked George Formby . 20 After Parkess family moved to Scotland the three cousins often spent their school holidays together there. Parkes recalled John cousin Leila and I were very close. From Edinburgh we would drive up to the family croft at Durness which was from about the time John was nine years old until he was about 16. 21 Lennons uncle George died of a liver haemorrhage on 5 June 1955 aged 52. 22 Lennon was raised as an Anglican and attended Dovedale Primary School . 23 After passing his eleven-plus exam he attended Quarry Bank High School in Liverpool from September 1952 to 1957 and was described by Harvey at the time as a happy-go-lucky good-humoured easy going lively lad . 24 However he was also known to frequently engage in fights bully and disrupt classes. 25 Despite this he quickly built a reputation as the class clown 26 and often drew comical cartoons that appeared in his self-made school magazine the Daily Howl . 27 nb 2 In 1956 Julia bought John his first guitar. The instrument was an inexpensive Gallotone Champion acoustic for which she lent her son five pounds and ten shillings on the condition that the guitar be delivered to her own house and not Mimis knowing well that her sister was not supportive of her sons musical aspirations. 29 Mimi was sceptical of his claim that he would be famous one day and she hoped that he would grow bored with music often telling him The guitars all very well John but youll never make a living out of it. 30 Lennons senior school years were marked by a shift in his behaviour. Teachers at Quarry Bank High School described him thus: He has too many wrong ambitions and his energy is often misplaced and His work always lacks effort. He is content to drift instead of using his abilities. 31 Lennons misbehaviour created a rift in his relationship with his aunt. On 15 July 1958 at the age of 44 Julia Lennon was struck and killed by a car while she was walking home after visiting the Smiths house. 32 His mothers death traumatised the teenage Lennon who for the next two years drank heavily and frequently got into fights consumed by a blind rage . 33 Julias memory would later serve as a major creative inspiration for Lennon inspiring songs such as the 1968 Beatles song Julia . 34 Lennon failed his O-level examinations and was accepted into the Liverpool College of Art after his aunt and headmaster intervened. 35 At the college he began to wear Teddy Boy clothes and was threatened with expulsion for his behaviour. 36 In the description of Cynthia Powell Lennons fellow student and subsequently his wife he was thrown out of the college before his final year . 37 The Quarrymen to the Beatles: 19561970 Further information: The Quarrymen LennonMcCartney The Beatles Beatlemania British Invasion and More popular than Jesus Formation fame and touring: 19561966 Ringo Starr George Harrison Lennon and Paul McCartney in 1963 At the age of 15 Lennon formed a skiffle group the Quarrymen. Named after Quarry Bank High School the group was established by Lennon in September 1956. 38 By the summer of 1957 the Quarrymen played a spirited set of songs made up of half skiffle and half rock and roll . 39 Lennon first met Paul McCartney at the Quarrymens second performance which was held in Woolton on 6 July at the St Peters Church garden fete. Lennon then asked McCartney to join the band. 40 McCartney said that Aunt Mimi was very aware that Johns friends were lower class and would often patronise him when he arrived to visit Lennon. 41 According to McCartneys brother Mike their father similarly disapproved of Lennon declaring that Lennon would get his son into trouble . 42 McCartneys father nevertheless allowed the fledgling band to rehearse in the familys front room at 20 Forthlin Road . 43 44 During this time Lennon wrote his first song Hello Little Girl which became a UK top 10 hit for the Fourmost in 1963. 45 McCartney recommended that his friend George Harrison become the lead guitarist. 46 Lennon thought that Harrison then 14 years old was too young. McCartney engineered an audition on the upper deck of a Liverpool bus where Harrison played Raunchy for Lennon and was asked to join. 47 Stuart Sutcliffe Lennons friend from art school later joined as bassist. 48 Lennon McCartney Harrison and Sutcliffe became The Beatles in early 1960. In August that year the Beatles were engaged for a 48-night residency in Hamburg in West Germany and were desperately in need of a drummer. They asked Pete Best to join them. 49 Lennons aunt horrified when he told her about the trip pleaded with Lennon to continue his art studies instead. 50 After the first Hamburg residency the band accepted another in April 1961 and a third in April 1962. As with the other band members Lennon was introduced to Preludin while in Hamburg 51 and regularly took the drug as a stimulant during their long overnight performances. 52 Lennon in 1964 Brian Epstein managed the Beatles from 1962 until his death in 1967. He had no previous experience managing artists but he had a strong influence on the groups dress code and attitude on stage. 53 Lennon initially resisted his attempts to encourage the band to present a professional appearance but eventually complied saying Ill wear a bloody balloon if somebodys going to pay me. 54 McCartney took over on bass after Sutcliffe decided to stay in Hamburg and Best was replaced with drummer Ringo Starr ; this completed the four-piece line-up that would remain until the groups break-up in 1970. The bands first single Love Me Do was released in October 1962 and reached No. 17 on the British charts. They recorded their debut album Please Please Me in under 10 hours on 11 February 1963 55 a day when Lennon was suffering the effects of a cold 56 which is evident in the vocal on the last song to be recorded that day Twist and Shout . 57 The LennonMcCartney songwriting partnership yielded eight of its fourteen tracks. With a few exceptions one being the album title itself Lennon had yet to bring his love of wordplay to bear on his song lyrics saying: We were just writing songs ... pop songs with no more thought of them than that to create a sound. And the words were almost irrelevant . 55 In a 1987 interview McCartney said that the other Beatles idolised Lennon: He was like our own little Elvis ... We all looked up to John. He was older and he was very much the leader; he was the quickest wit and the smartest. 58 The Beatles achieved mainstream success in the UK early in 1963. Lennon was on tour when his first son Julian was born in April. During their Royal Variety Show performance which was attended by the Queen Mother and other British royalty Lennon poked fun at the audience: For our next song Id like to ask for your help. For the people in the cheaper seats clap your hands ... and the rest of you if youll just rattle your jewellery. 59 After a year of Beatlemania in the UK the groups historic February 1964 US debut appearance on The Ed Sullivan Show marked their breakthrough to international stardom. A two-year period of constant touring filmmaking and songwriting followed during which Lennon wrote two books In His Own Write and A Spaniard in the Works . 60 The Beatles received recognition from the British establishment when they were appointed Members of the Order of the British Empire MBE in the 1965 Queens Birthday Honours . 61 McCartney Harrison and Lennon 1964 Lennon grew concerned that fans who attended Beatles concerts were unable to hear the music above the screaming of fans and that the bands musicianship was beginning to suffer as a result. 62 Lennons Help! expressed his own feelings in 1965: I meant it ... It was me singing help . 63 He had put on weight he would later refer to this as his Fat Elvis period 64 and felt he was subconsciously seeking change. 65 In March that year he and Harrison were unknowingly introduced to LSD when a dentist hosting a dinner party attended by the two musicians and their wives spiked the guests coffee with the drug. 66 When they wanted to leave their host revealed what they had taken and strongly advised them not to leave the house because of the likely effects. Later in a lift at a nightclub they all believed it was on fire; Lennon recalled: We were all screaming ... hot and hysterical. 67 In March 1966 during an interview with Evening Standard reporter Maureen Cleave Lennon remarked Christianity will go. It will vanish and shrink ... Were more popular than Jesus now I dont know which will go first rock and roll or Christianity. 68 The comment went virtually unnoticed in England but caused great offence in the US when quoted by a magazine there five months later. The furore that followed which included the burning of Beatles records Ku Klux Klan activity and threats against Lennon contributed to the bands decision to stop touring. 69 Studio years break-up and solo work: 19661970 Lennon in 1967 After the bands final concert on 29 August 1966 Lennon filmed the anti-war black comedy How I Won the War his only appearance in a non-Beatles feature film before rejoining his bandmates for an extended period of recording beginning in November. 70 Lennon had increased his use of LSD 71 and according to author Ian MacDonald his continuous use of the drug in 1967 brought him close to erasing his identity . 72 The year 1967 saw the release of Strawberry Fields Forever hailed by Time magazine for its astonishing inventiveness 73 and the groups landmark album Sgt. Peppers Lonely Hearts Club Band which revealed lyrics by Lennon that contrasted strongly with the simple love songs of the groups early years. 74 In late June the Beatles performed Lennons All You Need Is Love as Britains contribution to the Our World satellite broadcast before an international audience estimated at up to 400 million. 75 Intentionally simplistic in its message 76 the song formalised his pacifist stance and provided an anthem for the Summer of Love . 77 After the Beatles were introduced to the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi the group attended an August weekend of personal instruction at his Transcendental Meditation seminar in Bangor Wales. 78 During the seminar they were informed of Epsteins death. I knew we were in trouble then Lennon said later. I didnt have any misconceptions about our ability to do anything other than play music. I was scared I thought Weve fucking had it now. 79 McCartney organised the groups first post-Epstein project 80 the self-written -produced and -directed television film Magical Mystery Tour which was released in December that year. While the film itself proved to be their first critical flop its soundtrack release featuring Lennons Lewis Carroll inspired I Am the Walrus was a success. 81 82 Led by Harrison and Lennons interest the Beatles travelled to the Maharishis ashram in India in February 1968 for further guidance. 83 While there they composed most of the songs for their double album The Beatles 84 but the band members mixed experience with Transcendental Meditation signalled a sharp divergence in the groups camaraderie. 85 On their return to London they became increasingly involved in business activities with the formation of Apple Corps a multimedia corporation composed of Apple Records and several other subsidiary companies. Lennon described the venture as an attempt to achieve artistic freedom within a business structure . 86 Released amid the Protests of 1968 the bands debut single for the Apple label included Lennons B-side Revolution in which he called for a plan rather than committing to Maoist revolution. The songs pacifist message led to ridicule from political radicals in the New Left press. 87 Adding to the tensions at the Beatles recording sessions that year Lennon insisted on having his new girlfriend the Japanese artist Yoko Ono beside him thereby contravening the bands policy regarding wives and girlfriends in the studio. He was especially pleased with his songwriting contributions to the double album and identified it as a superior work to Sgt. Pepper . 88 At the end of 1968 Lennon participated in The Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus a television special that was not broadcast. Lennon performed with the Dirty Mac a supergroup composed of Lennon Eric Clapton Keith Richards and Mitch Mitchell . The group also backed a vocal performance by Ono. A film version was released in 1996. 89 Yoko Ono and Lennon in March 1969 By late 1968 Lennons increased drug use and growing preoccupation with Ono combined with the Beatles inability to agree on how the company should be run left Apple in need of professional management. Lennon asked Lord Beeching to take on the role but he declined advising Lennon to go back to making records. Lennon was approached by Allen Klein who had managed the Rolling Stones and other bands during the British Invasion . In early 1969 Klein was appointed as Apples chief executive by Lennon Harrison and Starr 90 but McCartney never signed the management contract. 91 Lennon and Ono were married on 20 March 1969 and soon released a series of 14 lithographs called Bag One depicting scenes from their honeymoon 92 eight of which were deemed indecent and most of which were banned and confiscated. 93 Lennons creative focus continued to move beyond the Beatles and between 1968 and 1969 he and Ono recorded three albums of experimental music together: Unfinished Music No. 1: Two Virgins 94 known more for its cover than for its music Unfinished Music No. 2: Life with the Lions and Wedding Album . In 1969 they formed the Plastic Ono Band releasing Live Peace in Toronto 1969 . Between 1969 and 1970 Lennon released the singles Give Peace a Chance which was widely adopted as an anti- Vietnam War anthem 95 Cold Turkey which documented his withdrawal symptoms after he became addicted to heroin 96 and Instant Karma! . Give Peace a Chance Sample of Give Peace a Chance recorded in Montreal in 1969 during Lennon and Onos second bed-in. As described by biographer Bill Harry Lennon wanted to write a peace anthem that would take over from the song We Shall Overcome and he succeeded ... it became the main anti- Vietnam protest song. 97 Problems playing this file? See media help . In protest at Britains involvement in the Nigeria-Biafra thing 98 namely the Nigerian Civil War 99 its support of America in the Vietnam War and perhaps jokingly against Cold Turkey slipping down the charts 100 Lennon returned his MBE medal to the Queen. This gesture had no effect on his MBE status which could be renounced but ultimately only the Sovereign has the power to annul the original award. 101 102 The medal together with Lennons letter is held at the Central Chancery of the Orders of Knighthood . 100 Lennon left the Beatles on 20 September 1969 103 but agreed not to inform the media while the group renegotiated their recording contract. He was outraged that McCartney publicised his own departure on releasing his debut solo album in April 1970. Lennons reaction was Jesus Christ! He gets all the credit for it! 104 He later wrote I started the band. I disbanded it. Its as simple as that. 105 In a December 1970 interview with Jann Wenner of Rolling Stone magazine he revealed his bitterness towards McCartney saying I was a fool not to do what Paul did which was use it to sell a record. 106 Lennon also spoke of the hostility he perceived the other members had towards Ono and of how he Harrison and Starr got fed up with being sidemen for Paul ... After Brian Epstein died we collapsed. Paul took over and supposedly led us. But what is leading us when we went round in circles? 107 Solo career: 19701980 Initial solo success and activism: 19701972 Advertisement for Imagine from Billboard 18 September 1971 When it gets down to having to use violence then you are playing the systems game. The establishment will irritate you pull your beard flick your face to make you fight. Because once theyve got you violent then they know how to handle you. The only thing they dont know how to handle is non-violence and humor. John Lennon 108 109 Between 1 April and 15 September 1970 Lennon and Ono went through primal therapy with Arthur Janov at Tittenhurst in London and at Janovs clinic in Los Angeles California. Designed to release emotional pain from early childhood the therapy entailed two half-days a week with Janov for six months; he had wanted to treat the couple for longer but their American visa ran out and they had to return to the UK. 110 Lennons debut solo album John LennonPlastic Ono Band 1970 was received with praise by many music critics but its highly personal lyrics and stark sound limited its commercial performance. 111 The album featured the song Mother in which Lennon confronted his feelings of childhood rejection 112 and the Dylanesque Working Class Hero a bitter attack against the bourgeois social system which due to the lyric youre still fucking peasants fell foul of broadcasters. 113 114 In January 1971 Tariq Ali expressed his revolutionary political views when he interviewed Lennon who immediately responded by writing Power to the People . In his lyrics to the song Lennon reversed the non-confrontational approach he had espoused in Revolution although he later disowned Power to the People saying that it was borne out of guilt and a desire for approval from radicals such as Ali. 115 Lennon became involved in a protest against the prosecution of Oz magazine for alleged obscenity. Lennon denounced the proceedings as disgusting fascism and he and Ono as Elastic Oz Band released the single God Save UsDo the Oz and joined marches in support of the magazine. 116 Imagine Sample of Imagine Lennons most widely known post-Beatles song. 117 Like Give Peace a Chance the song became an anti-war anthem but its lyrics offended religious groups. Lennons explanation was: If you can imagine a world at peace with no denominations of religion not without religion but without this my god is bigger than your god thing then it can be true. 118 Problems playing this file? See media help . Eager for a major commercial success Lennon adopted a more accessible sound for his next album Imagine 1971. 119 Rolling Stone reported that it contains a substantial portion of good music but warned of the possibility that his posturings will soon seem not merely dull but irrelevant . 120 The albums title track later became an anthem for anti-war movements 121 while the song How Do You Sleep? was a musical attack on McCartney in response to lyrics on Ram that Lennon felt and McCartney later confirmed 122 were directed at him and Ono. 123 nb 3 In Jealous Guy Lennon addressed his demeaning treatment of women acknowledging that his past behaviour was the result of long-held insecurity. 125 In gratitude for his guitar contributions to Imagine Lennon initially agreed to perform at Harrisons Concert for Bangladesh benefit shows in New York. 126 Harrison refused to allow Ono to participate at the concerts however which resulted in the couple having a heated argument and Lennon pulling out of the event. 127 Lennon and Ono moved to New York in August 1971 and immediately embraced US radical left politics . The couple released their Happy Xmas War Is Over single in December. 128 During the new year the Nixon administration took what it called a strategic counter-measure against Lennons anti-war and anti-Nixon propaganda. The administration embarked on what would be a four-year attempt to deport him . 129 130 Lennon was embroiled in a continuing legal battle with the immigration authorities and he was denied permanent residency in the US ; the issue would not be resolved until 1976. 131 Some Time in New York City was recorded as a collaboration with Ono and was released in 1972 with backing from the New York band Elephants Memory . A double LP it contained songs about womens rights race relations Britains role in Northern Ireland and Lennons difficulties in obtaining a green card. 132 The album was a commercial failure and was maligned by critics who found its political sloganeering heavy-handed and relentless. 133 The NME s review took the form of an open letter in which Tony Tyler derided Lennon as a pathetic ageing revolutionary . 134 In the US Woman Is the Nigger of the World was released as a single from the album and was televised on 11 May on The Dick Cavett Show . Many radio stations refused to broadcast the song because of the word nigger . 135 Lennon and Ono gave two benefit concerts with Elephants Memory and guests in New York in aid of patients at the Willowbrook State School mental facility. 136 Staged at Madison Square Garden on 30 August 1972 they were his last full-length concert appearances. 137 After George McGovern lost the 1972 presidential election to Richard Nixon Lennon and Ono attended a post-election wake held in the New York home of activist Jerry Rubin . 129 Lennon was depressed and got intoxicated; he left Ono embarrassed after he had sex with a female guest. Onos song Death of Samantha was inspired by the incident. 138 Lennon in 1974 Lost weekend : 19731975 Publicity photo of Lennon and host Tom Snyder from the television programme Tomorrow . Aired in 1975 this was the last television interview Lennon gave before his death in 1980. As Lennon was about to record Mind Games in 1973 he and Ono decided to separate. The ensuing 18-month period apart which he later called his lost weekend in reference to the film of the same name 139 140 was spent in Los Angeles and New York City in the company of May Pang . 141 Mind Games credited to the Plastic U.F.Ono Band was released in November 1973. Lennon also contributed Im the Greatest to Starrs album Ringo 1973 released the same month. With Harrison joining Starr and Lennon at the recording session for the song it marked the only occasion when three former Beatles recorded together between the bands break-up and Lennons death. 142 nb 4 In early 1974 Lennon was drinking heavily and his alcohol-fuelled antics with Harry Nilsson made headlines. In March two widely publicised incidents occurred at The Troubadour club. In the first incident Lennon stuck an unused menstrual pad on his forehead and scuffled with a waitress. The second incident occurred two weeks later when Lennon and Nilsson were ejected from the same club after heckling the Smothers Brothers . 144 Lennon decided to produce Nilssons album Pussy Cats and Pang rented a Los Angeles beach house for all the musicians. 145 After a month of further debauchery the recording sessions were in chaos and Lennon returned to New York with Pang to finish work on the album. In April Lennon had produced the Mick Jagger song Too Many Cooks Spoil the Soup which was for contractual reasons to remain unreleased for more than 30 years. Pang supplied the recording for its eventual inclusion on The Very Best of Mick Jagger 2007. 146 Lennon had settled back in New York when he recorded the album Walls and Bridges . Released in October 1974 it included Whatever Gets You thru the Night which featured Elton John on backing vocals and piano and became Lennons only single as a solo artist to top the US Billboard Hot 100 chart during his lifetime. 147 nb 5 A second single from the album 9 Dream followed before the end of the year. Starrs Goodnight Vienna 1974 again saw assistance from Lennon who wrote the title track and played piano. 149 On 28 November Lennon made a surprise guest appearance at Elton Johns Thanksgiving concert at Madison Square Garden in fulfilment of his promise to join the singer in a live show if Whatever Gets You thru the Night a song whose commercial potential Lennon had doubted reached number one. Lennon performed the song along with Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds and I Saw Her Standing There which he introduced as a song by an old estranged fiance of mine called Paul . 150 In the first two weeks of January 1975 Elton John topped the US Billboard Hot 100 singles chart with his cover of Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds featuring Lennon on guitar and backing vocals - Lennon is credited on the single under the moniker of Dr. Winston OBoogie . As January became February Lennon and Ono reunited as Lennon and Bowie completed recording of their co-composition Fame 110 151 152 153 which became David Bowie s first US number one featuring guitar and backing vocals by Lennon. In February Lennon released Rock n Roll 1975 an album of cover songs. Stand by Me taken from the album and a US and UK hit became his last single for five years. 154 He made what would be his final stage appearance in the ATV special A Salute to Lew Grade recorded on 18 April and televised in June. 155 Playing acoustic guitar and backed by an eight-piece band Lennon performed two songs from Rock n Roll Stand by Me which was not broadcast and Slippin and Slidin followed by Imagine . 155 The band known as Etc. wore masks behind their heads a dig by Lennon who thought Grade was two-faced. 156 Hiatus and return: 19751980 Lennons green card which allowed him to live and work in the United States Sean was Lennons only child with Ono. Sean was born on 9 October 1975 Lennons thirty-fifth birthday and John took on the role of househusband. Lennon began what would be a five-year hiatus from the music industry during which time he later said he baked bread and looked after the baby . 157 He devoted himself to Sean rising at 6 am daily to plan and prepare his meals and to spend time with him. 158 He wrote Cookin In the Kitchen of Love for Starrs Ringos Rotogravure 1976 performing on the track in June in what would be his last recording session until 1980. 159 He formally announced his break from music in Tokyo in 1977 saying we have basically decided without any great decision to be with our baby as much as we can until we feel we can take time off to indulge ourselves in creating things outside of the family. 160 During his career break he created several series of drawings and drafted a book containing a mix of autobiographical material and what he termed mad stuff 161 all of which would be published posthumously. Lennon emerged from his hiatus in October 1980 when he released the single Just Like Starting Over . In November he and Ono released the album Double Fantasy which included songs Lennon had written in Bermuda . In June Lennon chartered a 43-foot sailboat and embarked on a sailing trip to Bermuda. En route he and the crew encountered a storm rendering everyone on board seasick except Lennon who took control and sailed the boat through the storm. This experience re-invigorated him and his creative muse. He spent three weeks in Bermuda in a home called Fairylands writing and refining the tracks for the upcoming album. 162 163 164 165 The music reflected Lennons fulfilment in his new-found stable family life. 166 Sufficient additional material was recorded for a planned follow-up album Milk and Honey which was issued posthumously in 1984. 167 Double Fantasy was not well received initially and drew comments such as Melody Maker s indulgent sterility ... a godawful yawn . 168 Murder Main article: Murder of John Lennon Wintertime at Strawberry Fields in Central Park with the Dakota in the background In New York at approximately 5:00 p.m. on 8 December 1980 Lennon autographed a copy of Double Fantasy for Mark David Chapman before leaving The Dakota with Ono for a recording session at the Record Plant . 169 After the session Lennon and Ono returned to the Dakota in a limousine at around 10:50 p.m. EST. They left the vehicle and walked through the archway of the building. Chapman then shot Lennon twice in the back and twice in the shoulder 170 at close range. Lennon was rushed in a police cruiser to the emergency room of Roosevelt Hospital where he was pronounced dead on arrival at 11:15 p.m. EST. 171 172 Ono issued a statement the next day saying There is no funeral for John ending it with the words John loved and prayed for the human race. Please do the same for him. 173 His remains were cremated at Ferncliff Cemetery in Hartsdale New York . Ono scattered his ashes in New Yorks Central Park where the Strawberry Fields memorial was later created. 174 Chapman avoided going to trial when he ignored his lawyers advice and pleaded guilty to second-degree murder and was sentenced to 20-years-to-life. 175 nb 6 In the weeks following the murder Just Like Starting Over and Double Fantasy topped the charts in the UK and the US. 177 Imagine hit number one in the UK in January 1981 and Happy Xmas peaked at number two. 178 Imagine was succeeded at the top of the UK chart by Woman the second single from Double Fantasy . 179 Later that year Roxy Music s cover version of Jealous Guy recorded as a tribute to Lennon was also a UK number-one. 23 Personal relationships Cynthia Lennon John and Cynthia Lennon sitting in an airplane on a stopover in Los Angeles in 1964 Lennon met Cynthia Powell 19392015 in 1957 when they were fellow students at the Liverpool College of Art . 180 Although Powell was intimidated by Lennons attitude and appearance she heard that he was obsessed with the French actress Brigitte Bardot so she dyed her hair blonde. Lennon asked her out but when she said that she was engaged he shouted I didnt ask you to fuckin marry me did I? 181 She often accompanied him to Quarrymen gigs and travelled to Hamburg with McCartneys girlfriend to visit him. 182 Lennon was jealous by nature and eventually grew possessive often terrifying Powell with his anger. 183 In her 2005 memoir John Powell recalled that when they were dating Lennon once struck her after he observed her dancing with Stuart Sutcliffe. 184 She ended their relationship as a result until three months later when Lennon apologised and asked to reunite. 185 She took him back and later noted that he was never again physically abusive towards her although he could still be verbally cutting and unkind . 186 Lennon later said that until he met Ono he had never questioned his chauvinistic attitude towards women. He said that the Beatles song Getting Better told his or his peers own story. I used to be cruel to my woman and physically any woman. I was a hitter. I couldnt express myself and I hit. I fought men and I hit women. That is why I am always on about peace . 187 Recalling his July 1962 reaction when he learned that Cynthia was pregnant Lennon said Theres only one thing for it Cyn. Well have to get married. 188 The couple wed on 23 August at the Mount Pleasant Register Office in Liverpool with Brian Epstein serving as best man. His marriage began just as Beatlemania was taking off across the UK. He performed on the evening of his wedding day and would continue to do so almost daily from then on. 189 Epstein feared that fans would be alienated by the idea of a married Beatle and he asked the Lennons to keep their marriage secret. Julian was born on 8 April 1963; Lennon was on tour at the time and did not see his infant son until three days later. 190 Cynthia attributed the start of the marriage breakdown to Lennons use of LSD and she felt that he slowly lost interest in her as a result of his use of the drug. 191 When the group travelled by train to Bangor Wales in 1967 for the Maharishi Yogi s Transcendental Meditation seminar a policeman did not recognise her and stopped her from boarding. She later recalled how the incident seemed to symbolise the end of their marriage. 192 After spending a holiday in Greece 193 Cynthia arrived home at Kenwood to find Lennon sitting on the floor with Ono in terrycloth robes 194 and left the house to stay with friends feeling shocked and humiliated. 195 A few weeks later Alexis Mardas informed Powell that Lennon was seeking a divorce and custody of Julian. 196 She received a letter stating that Lennon was doing so on the grounds of her adultery with Italian hotelier Roberto Bassanini an accusation which Powell denied. 197 After negotiations Lennon capitulated and agreed to let her divorce him on the same grounds. 198 The case was settled out of court in November 1968 with Lennon giving her 100 000 a small annual payment and custody of Julian. 199 Brian Epstein Brian Epstein in 1965 The Beatles were performing at Liverpools Cavern Club in November 1961 when they were introduced to Brian Epstein after a midday concert. Epstein was homosexual and closeted and according to biographer Philip Norman one of Epsteins reasons for wanting to manage the group was that he was attracted to Lennon. Almost as soon as Julian was born Lennon went on holiday to Spain with Epstein which led to speculation about their relationship. When he was later questioned about it Lennon said Well it was almost a love affair but not quite. It was never consummated. But it was a pretty intense relationship. It was my first experience with a homosexual that I was conscious was homosexual. We used to sit in a cafe in Torremolinos looking at all the boys and Id say Do you like that one? Do you like this one? I was rather enjoying the experience thinking like a writer all the time: I am experiencing this. 200 Soon after their return from Spain at McCartneys twenty-first birthday party in June 1963 Lennon physically attacked Cavern Club master of ceremonies Bob Wooler for saying How was your honeymoon John? The MC known for his wordplay and affectionate but cutting remarks was making a joke 201 but ten months had passed since Lennons marriage and the deferred honeymoon was still two months in the future. 202 Lennon was drunk at the time and the matter was simple: He called me a queer so I battered his bloody ribs in. 203 Lennon delighted in mocking Epstein for his homosexuality and for the fact that he was Jewish. 204 When Epstein invited suggestions for the title of his autobiography Lennon offered Queer Jew ; on learning of the eventual title A Cellarful of Noise he parodied More like A Cellarful of Boys . 205 He demanded of a visitor to Epsteins flat Have you come to blackmail him? If not youre the only bugger in London who hasnt. 204 During the recording of Baby Youre a Rich Man he sang altered choruses of Baby youre a rich fag Jew . 206 207 Julian Lennon Julian Lennon at the unveiling of the John Lennon Peace Monument During his marriage to Cynthia Lennons first son Julian was born at the same time that his commitments with the Beatles were intensifying at the height of Beatlemania . Lennon was touring with the Beatles when Julian was born on 8 April 1963. Julians birth like his mother Cynthias marriage to Lennon was kept secret because Epstein was convinced that public knowledge of such things would threaten the Beatles commercial success. Julian recalled that as a small child in Weybridge some four years later I was trundled home from school and came walking up with one of my watercolour paintings. It was just a bunch of stars and this blonde girl I knew at school. And Dad said Whats this? I said Its Lucy in the sky with diamonds. 208 Lennon used it as the title of a Beatles song and though it was later reported to have been derived from the initials LSD Lennon insisted Its not an acid song. 209 Lennon was distant from Julian who felt closer to McCartney than to his father. During a car journey to visit Cynthia and Julian during Lennons divorce McCartney composed a song Hey Jules to comfort him. It would evolve into the Beatles song Hey Jude . Lennon later said Thats his best song. It started off as a song about my son Julian ... he turned it into Hey Jude. I always thought it was about me and Yoko but he said it wasnt. 210 Lennons relationship with Julian was already strained and after Lennon and Ono moved to New York in 1971 Julian did not see his father again until 1973. 211 With Pangs encouragement arrangements were made for Julian and his mother to visit Lennon in Los Angeles where they went to Disneyland . 212 Julian started to see his father regularly and Lennon gave him a drumming part on a Walls and Bridges track. 213 He bought Julian a Gibson Les Paul guitar and other instruments and encouraged his interest in music by demonstrating guitar chord techniques. 213 Julian recalls that he and his father got on a great deal better during the time he spent in New York: We had a lot of fun laughed a lot and had a great time in general. 214 In a Playboy interview with David Sheff shortly before his death Lennon said Sean is a planned child and therein lies the difference. I dont love Julian any less as a child. Hes still my son whether he came from a bottle of whiskey or because they didnt have pills in those days. Hes here he belongs to me and he always will. 215 He said he was trying to reestablish a connection with the then 17-year-old and confidently predicted Julian and I will have a relationship in the future. 215 After his death it was revealed that he had left Julian very little in his will. 216 Yoko Ono John and Yoko redirects here. For other uses see John and Yoko disambiguation . Lennon and Ono in 1980 by Jack Mitchell Lennon with Ono in 1969 Lennon first met Yoko Ono on 9 November 1966 at the Indica Gallery in London where Ono was preparing her conceptual art exhibit. They were introduced by gallery owner John Dunbar . 217 Lennon was intrigued by Onos Hammer A Nail : patrons hammered a nail into a wooden board creating the art piece. Although the exhibition had not yet begun Lennon wanted to hammer a nail into the clean board but Ono stopped him. Dunbar asked her Dont you know who this is? Hes a millionaire! He might buy it. According to Lennons recollection in 1980 Ono had not heard of the Beatles but she relented on condition that Lennon pay her five shillings to which Lennon said he replied Ill give you an imaginary five shillings and hammer an imaginary nail in. 218 Ono subsequently related that Lennon had taken a bite out of the apple on display in her work Apple much to her fury. 219 nb 7 Ono began to telephone and visit Lennon at his home. When Cynthia asked him for an explanation Lennon explained that Ono was only trying to obtain money for her avant-garde bullshit . 222 While his wife was on holiday in Greece in May 1968 Lennon invited Ono to visit. They spent the night recording what would become the Two Virgins album after which he said they made love at dawn . 223 When Lennons wife returned home she found Ono wearing her bathrobe and drinking tea with Lennon who simply said Oh hi. 224 Ono became pregnant in 1968 and miscarried a male child on 21 November 1968 174 a few weeks after Lennons divorce from Cynthia was granted. 225 Two years before the Beatles disbanded Lennon and Ono began public protests against the Vietnam War . They were married in Gibraltar on 20 March 1969 226 and spent their honeymoon at the Hilton Amsterdam campaigning with a week-long bed-in. They planned another bed-in in the United States but were denied entry 227 so held one instead at the Queen Elizabeth Hotel in Montreal where they recorded Give Peace a Chance . 228 They often combined advocacy with performance art as in their Bagism first introduced during a Vienna press conference. Lennon detailed this period in the Beatles song The Ballad of John and Yoko . 229 Lennon changed his name by deed poll on 22 April 1969 adding Ono as a middle name. The brief ceremony took place on the roof of the Apple Corps building where the Beatles had performed their rooftop concert three months earlier. Although he used the name John Ono Lennon thereafter some official documents referred to him as John Winston Ono Lennon. 2 The couple settled at Tittenhurst Park at Sunninghill in Berkshire . 230 After Ono was injured in a car accident Lennon arranged for a king-size bed to be brought to the recording studio as he worked on the Beatles album Abbey Road . 231 Ono and Lennon moved to New York to a flat on Bank Street Greenwich Village. Looking for somewhere with better security they relocated in 1973 to the more secure Dakota overlooking Central Park at 1 West 72nd Street . 232 May Pang May Pang in 1983 ABKCO Industries was formed in 1968 by Allen Klein as an umbrella company to ABKCO Records . Klein hired May Pang as a receptionist in 1969. Through involvement in a project with ABKCO Lennon and Ono met her the following year. She became their personal assistant. In 1973 after she had been working with the couple for three years Ono confided that she and Lennon were becoming estranged. She went on to suggest that Pang should begin a physical relationship with Lennon telling her He likes you a lot. Astounded by Onos proposition Pang nevertheless agreed to become Lennons companion. The pair soon left for Los Angeles beginning an 18-month period he later called his lost weekend . 139 In Los Angeles Pang encouraged Lennon to develop regular contact with Julian whom he had not seen for two years. He also rekindled friendships with Starr McCartney Beatles roadie Mal Evans and Harry Nilsson . In June Lennon and Pang returned to Manhattan in their newly rented penthouse apartment where they prepared a spare room for Julian when he visited them. 233 Lennon who had been inhibited by Ono in this regard began to reestablish contact with other relatives and friends. By December he and Pang were considering a house purchase and he refused to accept Onos telephone calls. In February 1975 he agreed to meet Ono who claimed to have found a cure for smoking. After the meeting he failed to return home or call Pang. When Pang telephoned the next day Ono told her that Lennon was unavailable because he was exhausted after a hypnotherapy session. Two days later Lennon reappeared at a joint dental appointment; he was stupefied and confused to such an extent that Pang believed he had been brainwashed. Lennon told Pang that his separation from Ono was now over although Ono would allow him to continue seeing her as his mistress . 234 Sean Lennon Sean Lennon at a Free Tibet event in 1998 Ono had previously suffered three miscarriages in her attempt to have a child with Lennon. When Ono and Lennon were reunited she became pregnant again. She initially said that she wanted to have an abortion but changed her mind and agreed to allow the pregnancy to continue on the condition that Lennon adopt the role of househusband which he agreed to do. 235 Following Seans birth Lennons subsequent hiatus from the music industry would span five years. He had a photographer take pictures of Sean every day of his first year and created numerous drawings for him which were posthumously published as Real Love: The Drawings for Sean . Lennon later proudly declared He didnt come out of my belly but by God I made his bones because Ive attended to every meal and to how he sleeps and to the fact that he swims like a fish. 236 Former Beatles Further information: Collaborations between ex-Beatles Paul McCartney George Harrison and Ringo Starr Lennon left and the rest of the Beatles arriving in New York City in 1964 While Lennon remained consistently friendly with Starr during the years that followed the Beatles break-up in 1970 his relationships with McCartney and Harrison varied. He was initially close to Harrison but the two drifted apart after Lennon moved to the US in 1971. When Harrison was in New York for his December 1974 Dark Horse tour Lennon agreed to join him on stage but failed to appear after an argument over Lennons refusal to sign an agreement that would finally dissolve the Beatles legal partnership. 237 nb 8 Harrison later said that when he visited Lennon during his five years away from music he sensed that Lennon was trying to communicate but his bond with Ono prevented him. 238 239 Harrison offended Lennon in 1980 when he published I Me Mine an autobiography that Lennon felt made little mention of him. 240 Lennon told Playboy I was hurt by it. By glaring omission ... my influence on his life is absolutely zilch ... he remembers every two-bit sax player or guitarist he met in subsequent years. Im not in the book. 241 Lennons most intense feelings were reserved for McCartney. In addition to attacking him with the lyrics of How Do You Sleep? Lennon argued with him through the press for three years after the group split. The two later began to reestablish something of the close friendship they had once known and in 1974 they even played music together again before eventually growing apart once more. During McCartneys final visit in April 1976 Lennon said that they watched the episode of Saturday Night Live in which Lorne Michaels made a 3 000 offer to get the Beatles to reunite on the show. 242 According to Lennon the pair considered going to the studio to make a joke appearance attempting to claim their share of the money but they were too tired. 243 Lennon summarised his feelings towards McCartney in an interview three days before his death: Throughout my career Ive selected to work with ... only two people: Paul McCartney and Yoko Ono ... That aint bad picking. 244 Along with his estrangement from McCartney Lennon always felt a musical competitiveness with him and kept an ear on his music. During his career break from 1975 until shortly before his death according to Fred Seaman Lennon and Onos assistant at the time Lennon was content to sit back as long as McCartney was producing what Lennon saw as mediocre material. 245 Lennon took notice when McCartney released Coming Up in 1980 which was the year Lennon returned to the studio. Its driving me crackers! he jokingly complained because he could not get the tune out of his head. 245 That same year Lennon was asked whether the group were dreaded enemies or the best of friends and he replied that they were neither and that he had not seen any of them in a long time. But he also said I still love those guys. The Beatles are over but John Paul George and Ringo go on. 246 Political activism Further information: Bed-in and Bagism Recording Give Peace a Chance during the bed-in the Queen Elizabeth Hotel Montreal Lennon and Ono used their honeymoon as a bed-in at the Amsterdam Hilton Hotel ; the March 1969 event attracted worldwide media ridicule. 247 248 During a second bed-in three months later at the Queen Elizabeth Hotel in Montreal 249 Lennon wrote and recorded Give Peace a Chance . Released as a single the song was quickly interpreted as an anti-war anthem and sung by a quarter of a million demonstrators against the Vietnam War in Washington DC on 15 November the second Vietnam Moratorium Day . 95 250 In December they paid for billboards in 10 cities around the world which declared in the national language War Is Over! If You Want It . 251 During the year Lennon and Ono began to support efforts by the family of James Hanratty to prove his innocence. 252 Hanratty had been hanged in 1962. According to Lennon those who had condemned Hanratty were the same people who are running guns to South Africa and killing blacks in the streets ... The same bastards are in control the same people are running everything its the whole bullshit bourgeois scene. 253 In London Lennon and Ono staged a Britain Murdered Hanratty banner march and a Silent Protest For James Hanratty 254 and produced a 40-minute documentary on the case. At an appeal hearing more than thirty years later Hanrattys conviction was upheld after DNA evidence was found to match validating those who condemned him. 255 Lennon and Ono performing at the John Sinclair Freedom Rally in December 1971 Lennon and Ono showed their solidarity with the Clydeside UCS workers work-in of 1971 by sending a bouquet of red roses and a cheque for 5 000. 256 On moving to New York City in August that year they befriended two of the Chicago Seven Yippie peace activists Jerry Rubin and Abbie Hoffman . 257 Another political activist John Sinclair poet and co-founder of the White Panther Party was serving ten years in prison for selling two joints of marijuana after previous convictions for possession of the drug. 258 In December 1971 at Ann Arbor Michigan 15 000 people attended the John Sinclair Freedom Rally a protest and benefit concert with contributions from Lennon Stevie Wonder Bob Seger Bobby Seale of the Black Panther Party and others. 259 Lennon and Ono backed by David Peel and Jerry Rubin performed an acoustic set of four songs from their forthcoming Some Time in New York City album including John Sinclair whose lyrics called for his release. The day before the rally the Michigan Senate passed a bill that significantly reduced the penalties for possession of marijuana and four days later Sinclair was released on an appeal bond. 130 The performance was recorded and two of the tracks later appeared on John Lennon Anthology 1998. 260 Following the Bloody Sunday incident in Northern Ireland in 1972 Lennon said that given the choice between the British army and the IRA he would side with the latter. Lennon and Ono wrote two songs protesting British presence and actions in Ireland for their Some Time in New York City album: The Luck of the Irish and Sunday Bloody Sunday . In 2000 David Shayler a former member of Britains domestic security service MI5 suggested that Lennon had given money to the IRA though this was swiftly denied by Ono. 261 Biographer Bill Harry records that following Bloody Sunday Lennon and Ono financially supported the production of the film The Irish Tapes a political documentary with an Irish Republican slant. 262 In February 2000 Lennons cousin Stanley Parkes stated that the singer had given money to the IRA during the 1970s. 263 After the events of Bloody Sunday Lennon and Ono attended a protest in London while displaying a Red Mole newspaper with the headline For the IRA Against British Imperialism . 264 Our society is run by insane people for insane objectives. I think were being run by maniacs for maniacal ends and I think Im liable to be put away as insane for expressing that. Thats whats insane about it. John Lennon 265 According to FBI surveillance reports and confirmed by Tariq Ali in 2006 Lennon was sympathetic to the International Marxist Group a Trotskyist group formed in Britain in 1968. 266 However the FBI considered Lennon to have limited effectiveness as a revolutionary as he was constantly under the influence of narcotics . 267 In 1972 Lennon contributed a drawing and limerick titled Why Make It Sad to Be Gay? to Len Richmond and Gary Nogueras The Gay Liberation Book . 268 269 Lennons last act of political activism was a statement in support of the striking minority sanitation workers in San Francisco on 5 December 1980. He and Ono planned to join the workers protest on 14 December. 270 Deportation attempt Lennon with Ono in 1969 Following the impact of Give Peace a Chance and Happy Xmas War Is Over on the anti-war movement the Nixon administration heard rumours of Lennons involvement in a concert to be held in San Diego at the same time as the 1972 Republican National Convention 271 and tried to have him deported. Nixon believed that Lennons anti-war activities could cost him his reelection; 272 Republican Senator Strom Thurmond suggested in a February 1972 memo that deportation would be a strategic counter-measure against Lennon. 273 The next month the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service INS began deportation proceedings arguing that his 1968 misdemeanour conviction for cannabis possession in London had made him ineligible for admission to the United States. Lennon spent the next 3 1 2 years in and out of deportation hearings until 8 October 1975 when a court of appeals barred the deportation attempt stating the courts will not condone selective deportation based upon secret political grounds . 274 132 While the legal battle continued Lennon attended rallies and made television appearances. He and Ono co-hosted The Mike Douglas Show for a week in February 1972 introducing guests such as Jerry Rubin and Bobby Seale to mid-America. 275 In 1972 Bob Dylan wrote a letter to the INS defending Lennon stating: John and Yoko add a great voice and drive to the countrys so-called art institution. They inspire and transcend and stimulate and by doing so only help others to see pure light and in doing that put an end to this dull taste of petty commercialism which is being passed off as Artist Art by the overpowering mass media. Hurray for John and Yoko. Let them stay and live here and breathe. The countrys got plenty of room and space. Let John and Yoko stay! 276 277 On 23 March 1973 Lennon was ordered to leave the US within 60 days. 278 Ono meanwhile was granted permanent residence. In response Lennon and Ono held a press conference on 1 April 1973 at the New York City Bar Association where they announced the formation of the state of Nutopia ; a place with no land no boundaries no passports only people . 279 Waving the white flag of Nutopia two handkerchiefs they asked for political asylum in the US. The press conference was filmed and appeared in a 2006 documentary The U.S. vs. John Lennon . 280 nb 9 Soon after the press conference Nixons involvement in a political scandal came to light and in June the Watergate hearings began in Washington D.C. . They led to the presidents resignation 14 months later. 282 In December 1974 when he and members of his tour entourage visited the White House Harrison asked Gerald Ford Nixons successor to intercede in the matter. 283 Fords administration showed little interest in continuing the battle against Lennon and the deportation order was overturned in 1975. The following year Lennon received his green card certifying his permanent residency and when Jimmy Carter was inaugurated as president in January 1977 Lennon and Ono attended the Inaugural Ball. 282 FBI surveillance and declassified documents Further information: Jon Wiener Wiener and the Lennon FBI files Confidential here declassified and censored letter by J. Edgar Hoover about FBI surveillance of John Lennon After Lennons death historian Jon Wiener filed a Freedom of Information Act request for FBI files that documented the Bureaus role in the deportation attempt. 284 The FBI admitted it had 281 pages of files on Lennon but refused to release most of them on the grounds that they contained national security information. In 1983 Wiener sued the FBI with the help of the American Civil Liberties Union of Southern California . It took 14 years of litigation to force the FBI to release the withheld pages. 285 The ACLU representing Wiener won a favourable decision in their suit against the FBI in the Ninth Circuit in 1991. 286 287 The Justice Department appealed the decision to the Supreme Court in April 1992 but the court declined to review the case. 288 In 1997 respecting President Bill Clinton s newly instigated rule that documents should be withheld only if releasing them would involve foreseeable harm the Justice Department settled most of the outstanding issues outside court by releasing all but 10 of the contested documents. 288 Wiener published the results of his 14-year campaign in January 2000. Gimme Some Truth: The John Lennon FBI Files contained facsimiles of the documents including lengthy reports by confidential informants detailing the daily lives of anti-war activists memos to the White House transcripts of TV shows on which Lennon appeared and a proposal that Lennon be arrested by local police on drug charges . 289 The story is told in the documentary The US vs. John Lennon . The final 10 documents in Lennons FBI file which reported on his ties with London anti-war activists in 1971 and had been withheld as containing national security information provided by a foreign government under an explicit promise of confidentiality were released in December 2006. They contained no indication that the British government had regarded Lennon as a serious threat; one example of the released material was a report that two prominent British leftists had hoped Lennon would finance a left-wing bookshop and reading room. 290 Writing Beatles biographer Bill Harry wrote that Lennon began drawing and writing creatively at an early age with the encouragement of his uncle. He collected his stories poetry cartoons and caricatures in a Quarry Bank High School exercise book that he called the Daily Howl . The drawings were often of crippled people and the writings satirical and throughout the book was an abundance of wordplay. According to classmate Bill Turner Lennon created the Daily Howl to amuse his best friend and later Quarrymen bandmate Pete Shotton to whom he would show his work before he let anyone else see it. Turner said that Lennon had an obsession for Wigan Pier . It kept cropping up and in Lennons story A Carrot in a Potato Mine the mine was at the end of Wigan Pier. Turner described how one of Lennons cartoons depicted a bus stop sign annotated with the question Why? Above was a flying pancake and below a blind man wearing glasses leading along a blind dog also wearing glasses . 291 Lennons love of wordplay and nonsense with a twist found a wider audience when he was 24. Harry writes that In His Own Write 1964 was published after Some journalist who was hanging around the Beatles came to me and I ended up showing him the stuff. They said Write a book and thats how the first one came about . Like the Daily Howl it contained a mix of formats including short stories poetry plays and drawings. One story Good Dog Nigel tells the tale of a happy dog urinating on a lamp post barking wagging his tail until he suddenly hears a message that he will be killed at three oclock . The Times Literary Supplement considered the poems and stories remarkable ... also very funny ... the nonsense runs on words and images prompting one another in a chain of pure fantasy . Book Week reported This is nonsense writing but one has only to review the literature of nonsense to see how well Lennon has brought it off. While some of his homonyms are gratuitous word play many others have not only double meaning but a double edge. Lennon was not only surprised by the positive reception but that the book was reviewed at all and suggested that readers took the book more seriously than I did myself. It just began as a laugh for me . 292 In combination with A Spaniard in the Works 1965 In His Own Write formed the basis of the stage play The Lennon Play: In His Own Write 293 co-adapted by Victor Spinetti and Adrienne Kennedy . 294 After negotiations between Lennon Spinetti and the artistic director of the National Theatre Sir Laurence Olivier the play opened at The Old Vic in 1968. Lennon and Ono attended the opening night performance their second public appearance together. 294 In 1969 Lennon wrote Four in Hand a skit based on his teenage experiences of group masturbation for Kenneth Tynan s play Oh! Calcutta! 295 After Lennons death further works were published including Skywriting by Word of Mouth 1986 Ai: Japan Through John Lennons Eyes: A Personal Sketchbook 1992 with Lennons illustrations of the definitions of Japanese words and Real Love: The Drawings for Sean 1999. The Beatles Anthology 2000 also presented examples of his writings and drawings. Art In 1967 Lennon who had attended art school funded and anonymously participated in Onos art exhibition Half-A-Room that was held at Lisson Gallery . Following his collaborating with Ono in the form of The Plastic Ono Band that began in 1968 Lennon became involved with the Fluxus art movement. In the summer of 1968 Lennon began showing his painting and conceptual art at his You Are Here art exhibition held at Robert Fraser Gallery in London. 296 The show that was dedicated to Ono included a six foot in diameter round white monochrome painting called You Are Here 1968. Besides the white monochrome paint its surface contained only the tiny hand written inscription you are here . This painting and the show in general was conceived as a response to Onos conceptual art piece This is Not Here 1966 that was part of her Fluxus installation of wall text pieces called Blue Room Event 1966. Blue Room Event consisted of sentences that Ono wrote directly on her white New York apartment walls and ceiling. Lennons You Are Here show also included sixty charity collection boxes a pair of Lennons shoes with a sign that read I take my shoes off to you a ready made black bike an apparent homage to Marcel Duchamp and his 1917 Bicycle Wheel an overturned white hat labeled For The Artist and a large glass jar full of free-to-take you are here white pin badges . 297 A hidden camera secretly filmed the public reaction to the show. 298 For the 1 July opening Lennon dressed all in white as was Ono released 365 white balloons into the city sky. Each ballon had attached to it a small paper card to be mailed back to Lennon at the Robert Fraser Gallery at 69 Duke Street with the finders comments. 299 After moving to New York City from 18 April to 12 June 1970 Lennon and Ono presented a series of Fluxus conceptual art events and concerts at Joe Jones s Tone Deaf Music Store called GRAPEFRUIT FLUXBANQUET . Performances included Come Impersonating John Lennon Yoko Ono Grapefruit Banquet and Portrait of John Lennon as a Young Cloud by Yoko Everybody . 300 That same year Lennon also made The Complete Yoko Ono Word Poem Game 1970: a conceptual art poem collage that utilized the cut-up or decoupe aleatory technique typical of the work of John Cage and many Fluxus artists. The cut-up technique can be traced to at least the Dadaists of the 1920s but was popularized in the early 1960s by writer William S. Burroughs . For The Complete Yoko Ono Word Poem Game Lennon took the portrait photo of himself that was included in the packaging of the 1968 The Beatles LP aka The White Album and cut it into 134 small rectangles. A single word was written on the back of each fragment to be read in any order. The portrait image was meant to be reassembled in any order. The Complete Yoko Ono Word Poem Game was presented by Lennon to Ono on 28 July in an inscribed envelope for her to randomly assemble and reassemble at will. 301 Lennon made whimsical drawings and fine art prints on occasion until the end of his life. 302 For example Lennon exhibited at Eugene Schusters London Arts Gallery his Bag One lithographs in an exhibition that included several depicting erotic imagery. The show opened on 15 January 1970 and 24 hours later it was raided by police officers who confiscated 8 of the 14 lithos on the grounds of indecency . The lithographs had been drawn by Lennon in 1969 chronicling his wedding and honeymoon with Yoko Ono and one of their bed-ins staged in the interests of world peace. 303 In 1969 Lennon appeared in the Yoko Ono Fluxus art film Self-Portrait which consisted of a single forty-minute shot of Lennons penis. 304 The film was premiered at the Institute of Contemporary Arts . 305 306 In 1971 Lennon made an experimental art film called Erection that was edited on 16 mm film 307 by George Maciunas founder of the Fluxus art movement and avant-garde contemporary of Ono. 308 The film uses the songs Airmale and You from Onos 1971 album Fly as its soundtrack. 309 Musicianship Instruments Further information: John Lennons musical instruments and List of the Beatles instruments Lennons Les Paul Jr. Lennon played a mouth organ during a bus journey to visit his cousin in Scotland. Impressed the driver told Lennon of a harmonica he could have if he came to Edinburgh the following day where one had been stored in the bus depot since a passenger had left it on a bus. 310 The professional instrument quickly replaced Lennons toy; he often used the instrument during the Beatles Hamburg years and it became a signature sound in the groups early recordings. His mother taught him how to play the banjo later buying him an acoustic guitar. At 16 he played rhythm guitar with the Quarrymen. 311 As his career progressed he played a variety of electric guitars predominantly the Rickenbacker 325 Epiphone Casino and Gibson J-160E and from the start of his solo career the Gibson Les Paul Junior . 312 313 Double Fantasy producer Jack Douglas claimed that since his Beatle days Lennon habitually tuned his D-string slightly flat so his Aunt Mimi could tell which guitar was his on recordings. 314 Occasionally he played a six-string bass guitar the Fender Bass VI providing bass on some Beatles numbers Back in the U.S.S.R. The Long and Winding Road Helter Skelter that occupied McCartney with another instrument. 315 His other instrument of choice was the piano on which he composed many songs including Imagine described as his best-known solo work. 316 His jamming on a piano with McCartney in 1963 led to the creation of the Beatles first US number one I Want to Hold Your Hand . 317 In 1964 he became one of the first British musicians to acquire a Mellotron keyboard though it was not heard on a Beatles recording until Strawberry Fields Forever in 1967. 318 In 2024 a guitar of Lennons that was thought to have been lost was found in an attic and auctioned at Juliens Auctions for 2.9 million 2.68 million euros 319 Vocal style The British critic Nik Cohn observed of Lennon He owned one of the best pop voices ever rasped and smashed and brooding always fierce. Cohn wrote that Lennon performing Twist and Shout would rant his way into total incoherence half rupture himself. 320 When the Beatles recorded the song the final track during the mammoth one-day session that produced the bands 1963 debut album Please Please Me Lennons voice already compromised by a cold came close to giving out. Lennon said I couldnt sing the damn thing I was just screaming. 321 In the words of biographer Barry Miles Lennon simply shredded his vocal cords in the interests of rock n roll. 322 The Beatles producer George Martin tells how Lennon had an inborn dislike of his own voice which I could never understand. He was always saying to me: DO something with my voice! ... put something on it ... Make it different . 323 Martin obliged often using double-tracking and other techniques. 324 325 As his Beatles era segued into his solo career his singing voice found a widening range of expression. Biographer Chris Gregory writes of Lennon tentatively beginning to expose his insecurities in a number of acoustic-led confessional ballads so beginning the process of public therapy that will eventually culminate in the primal screams of Cold Turkey and the cathartic John LennonPlastic Ono Band . 326 Music critic Robert Christgau called this Lennons greatest vocal performance ... from scream to whine is modulated electronically ... echoed filtered and double tracked. 327 David Stuart Ryan described Lennons vocal delivery as ranging from extreme vulnerability sensitivity and even naivety to a hard rasping style. 328 Wiener too described contrasts saying the singers voice can be at first subdued; soon it almost cracks with despair . 329 Music historian Ben Urish recalled hearing the Beatles Ed Sullivan Show performance of This Boy played on the radio a few days after Lennons murder: As Lennons vocals reached their peak ... it hurt too much to hear him scream with such anguish and emotion. But it was my emotions I heard in his voice. Just like I always had. 330 Legacy Statue of Lennon outside The Cavern Club Liverpool John Lennon Airport in Liverpool Music historians Schinder and Schwartz wrote of the transformation in popular music styles that took place between the 1950s and the 1960s. They said that the Beatles influence cannot be overstated: having revolutionised the sound style and attitude of popular music and opened rock and rolls doors to a tidal wave of British rock acts the group then spent the rest of the 1960s expanding rocks stylistic frontiers . 331 On National Poetry Day in 1999 the BBC conducted a poll to identify the UKs favourite song lyric and announced Imagine as the winner. 118 Two home recording demos by Lennon Free as a Bird and Real Love were finished by the three surviving members of the Beatles when they reunited in 1994 and 1995. 332 Both songs were released as Beatles singles in conjunction with The Beatles Anthology compilations. A third song Now and Then was also worked on but not released until 2023 whereupon it was dubbed the last Beatles song topping the UK charts. 332 333 In 1997 Yoko Ono and the BMI Foundation established an annual music competition programme for songwriters of contemporary musical genres to honour John Lennons memory and his large creative legacy. 334 Over 400 000 have been given through BMI Foundations John Lennon Scholarships to talented young musicians in the United States. 334 In a 2006 Guardian article Jon Wiener wrote: For young people in 1972 it was thrilling to see Lennons courage in standing up to US President Nixon. That willingness to take risks with his career and his life is one reason why people still admire him today. 335 For music historians Urish and Bielen Lennons most significant effort was the self-portraits ... in his songs which spoke to for and about the human condition. 336 Writing for El Pais in 2024 Amaia Odriozola described Lennons Windsor glasses as being known all over the world and credited him with pioneering glasses as a style statement for musicians. 337 John Lennon Park in Havana Cuba In 2013 Downtown Music Publishing signed a publishing administration agreement for the US with Lenono Music and Ono Music home to the song catalogues of John Lennon and Yoko Ono respectively. Under the terms of the agreement Downtown represents Lennons solo works including Imagine Instant Karma We All Shine On Power to the People Happy Xmas War Is Over Jealous Guy Just Like Starting Over and others. 338 John Lennon Star at the Hollywood Walk of Fame Los Angeles California Lennon has been the subject of numerous memorials and tributes . In 2002 the airport in Lennons home town was renamed the Liverpool John Lennon Airport . 339 On what would have been Lennons 70th birthday in 2010 Cynthia and Julian Lennon unveiled the John Lennon Peace Monument in Chavasse Park Liverpool. 340 The sculpture entitled Peace Harmony exhibits peace symbols and carries the inscription Peace on Earth for the Conservation of Life In Honour of John Lennon 19401980 . 341 In December 2013 the International Astronomical Union named one of the craters on Mercury after Lennon. 342 There is a John Lennon Park in Havana Cuba which features a statue in his likeness sitting on a bench. 343 Accolades See also: List of awards and nominations received by the Beatles The LennonMcCartney songwriting partnership is regarded as one of the most influential and successful of the 20th century. As performer writer or co-writer Lennon had 25 number one singles in the US Hot 100 chart. nb 10 His album sales in the US stand at 14 million units. 349 Double Fantasy was his best-selling album 350 at three million shipments in the US. 351 Released shortly before his death it won the 1981 Grammy Award for Album of the Year . 4 That year the BRIT Award for Outstanding Contribution to Music was given to Lennon. 352 Street art image of Lennon on the Lennon Wall in Prague Participants in a 2002 BBC poll voted him eighth of 100 Greatest Britons . 353 Between 2003 and 2008 Rolling Stone recognised Lennon in several reviews of artists and music ranking him fifth of 100 Greatest Singers of All Time 354 and 38th of 100 Greatest Artists of All Time 355 and his albums John LennonPlastic Ono Band and Imagine 22nd and 76th respectively of Rolling Stones 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . 355 356 He was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire MBE with the other Beatles in 1965 but returned his medal in 1969 because of Britains involvement in the Nigeria-Biafra thing against our support of America in Vietnam and against Cold Turkey slipping down the charts . 357 358 Lennon was posthumously inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1987 359 and into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1994. 360 Discography Main articles: John Lennon discography and List of songs recorded by John Lennon See also: The Beatles albums discography and The Beatles singles discography Studio albums John LennonPlastic Ono Band Apple 1970 Imagine Apple 1971 Some Time in New York City with Yoko Ono Apple 1972 Mind Games Apple 1973 Walls and Bridges Apple 1974 Rock n Roll Apple 1975 Double Fantasy with Yoko Ono Geffen 1980 Milk and Honey Posthumous with Yoko Ono Polydor 1984 Experimental studio albums with Yoko Ono Unfinished Music No. 1: Two Virgins Apple 1968 Unfinished Music No. 2: Life with the Lions Zapple 1969 Wedding Album Apple 1969 Filmography All releases after his death in 1980 use archival footage. Main article: John Lennon discography Videography See also: The Beatles in film and The Beatles videos Film Year Title Role Notes 1964 A Hard Days Night Himself 1965 Help! Himself 1967 Bottoms Himself Documentary 1967 How I Won the War Gripweed 1967 Magical Mystery Tour Himself Ticket Salesman Magician with Coffee Also narrator writer and director producer uncredited 1967 Pink Floyd: London 66-67 Himself uncredited Documentary short 1968 Yellow Submarine Himself Cameo at the end 1968 Two Virgins Himself Short film writer producer director 1968 No. 5 Himself Short film writer producer director 1969 Bed Peace Himself Writer producer director 1969 Honeymoon Himself Writer producer director 1969 Self-Portrait Himself Short film writer producer director 1969 Walden Diaries Notes and Sketches Himself Documentary 1969 Muhammad Ali the Greatest Himself Documentary 1970 Apotheosis Himself Short film writer producer director 1970 Let It Be Himself Documentary executive producer as The Beatles 1970 Fly Short film writer producer director 1970 Freedom Short film music writer producer director 1970 3 Days in the Life Himself Documentary 1971 Breathing Together: Revolution of the Electric Family Himself Documentary 1971 Up Your Legs Forever Producer director 1971 Erection Short film producer director 1971 Clock Himself Singer Music writer producer director 1971 Sweet Toronto Himself Concert film 1971 The Museum of Modern Art Show Himself Documentary short 1972 Ten for Two: The John Sinclair Freedom Rally Himself Documentary 1972 Eat the Document Himself Documentary 1976 Chelsea Girls with Andy Warhol Himself Documentary 1977 The Day the Music Died Himself Documentary 1982 The Compleat Beatles Himself Documentary 1988 Imagine: John Lennon Himself Documentary 1990 The Beatles: The First U.S. Visit Himself Documentary 1996 The Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus Himself Concert film from 1968 2003 Lennon Legend: The Very Best of John Lennon Himself Remastered music video collection 2006 The U.S. vs. John Lennon Himself Documentary 2006 John Yoko: Give Peace a Song Himself Documentary 2007 I Met the Walrus Himself voice Short film recorded 1969 2008 All Together Now Himself Documentary 2010 LennoNYC Himself Documentary 2016 The Beatles: Eight Days a Week Himself Documentary 2021 The Beatles: Get Back Himself Documentary Television Year Title Role Notes 196364 Ready Steady Go! Himself Music program 4 episodes 1964 Around the Beatles Himself Concert special 1964 Whats Happening! The Beatles in the U.S.A. Himself Documentary 196465 The Ed Sullivan Show Himself Variety show 4 episodes 1965 The Music of Lennon McCartney Himself Variety tribute special 196566 Not Only... But Also Lavatory Attendant Guest Episodes: Episode 1.1 1965 and Christmas Special 1966 1966 The Beatles at Shea Stadium Himself Concert special 1966 The Beatles in Japan Himself Concert special 1969 Rape Himself Dramathriller sound editor writer producer director 197172 The Dick Cavett Show Himself Talk show 3 episodes 1972 John Lennon and Yoko Ono Present the One-to-One Concert Himself Concert special 1972 Imagine Himself Music film special 1975 A Salute to the Beatles: Once upon a Time Himself Documentary 1977 All You Need Is Love: The Story of Popular Music Himself Documentary mini-series 1987 It Was Twenty Years Ago Today Himself Documentary 1995 The Beatles Anthology Himself Documentary mini-series 2000 Gimme Some Truth: The Making of John Lennons Imagine Album Himself Documentary 2000 John Yokos Year of Peace Himself Documentary 2008 Classic Albums : John LennonPlastic Ono Band Himself Documentary 2018 John Yoko: Above Us Only Sky Himself Documentary Bibliography In His Own Write 1964 A Spaniard in the Works 1965 Skywriting by Word of Mouth 1986 Lyrics of John Lennon 1997 The John Lennon Letters 2012 See also Outline of the Beatles The Beatles timeline List of peace activists Notes Lennon changed his name by deed poll on 22 April 1969 adding Ono as a middle name. Although he used the name John Ono Lennon thereafter official documents referred to him as John Winston Ono Lennon. 2 In 2005 the National Postal Museum in the US acquired a stamp collection that Lennon had assembled when he was a boy. 28 Lennon softened his stance in the mid-1970s however and said he had written How Do You Sleep? about himself. 123 In 1980 he said that rather than the song representing a terrible vicious horrible vendetta against McCartney I used my resentment and withdrawing from Paul and the Beatles and the relationship with Paul to write How Do You Sleep. I dont really go round with those thoughts in my head all the time. 124 An alternate take of Im the Greatest with Lennon singing a guide vocal appears on John Lennon Anthology . 143 Imagine topped the US singles chart compiled by Record World magazine however in 1971. 148 In September 2022 he was denied parole for the 12th time. 176 According to McCartney he himself met Ono a few weeks before this event 220 when she visited him in the hope of obtaining a LennonMcCartney song manuscript for a book John Cage was working on Notations . McCartney declined to give her any of his own manuscripts but suggested that Lennon might oblige. When asked Lennon gave Ono the original handwritten lyrics to The Word . 221 Lennon eventually signed the papers while he was on holiday in Florida with Pang and Julian. 237 Lennons Mind Games 1973 included the track Nutopian International Anthem which comprised three seconds of silence. 281 Lennon was responsible for 25 Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles as performer writer or co-writer. Solo 2: Whatever Gets You thru the Night Just Like Starting Over . 344 With the Beatles 20: Cant Buy Me Love I Feel Fine I Want to Hold Your Hand Love Me Do She Loves You A Hard Days Night Eight Days a Week Help! Ticket to Ride Yesterday Paperback Writer We Can Work It Out All You Need Is Love Hello Goodbye Penny Lane Hey Jude Something Come Together Get Back Let It Be The Long and Winding Road For You Blue . 345 As co-writer of and performer on releases by another artist 2: Fame David Bowie 346 Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds Elton John. 347 As co-writer of releases by other artists 1: A World Without Love Peter and Gordon 348 References Citations Christgau Robert . John Lennon Biography Songs Albums Death Facts . Britannica . Retrieved 18 February 2024 . a b Coleman 1984b p. 64. Newman Jason 23 August 2011. It Takes Two: 10 Songwriting Duos That Rocked Music History . Billboard . Archived from the original on 23 June 2018 . Retrieved 5 October 2017 . By any measure no one comes close to matching the success of The Beatles primary songwriters. a b 24th Annual GRAMMY Awards GRAMMY.com . www.grammy.com . Harry 2000b p. 504. Spitz 2005 p. 24: Julia offered the name in honour of ... Winston Churchill . Spitz 2005 p. 24: The entire Stanley clan gathered nightly at Newcastle Road . Lennon 2005 p. 54: Until then he had sent her money each month from his wages but now it stopped . Spitz 2005 p. 26: In February 1944 ... he was arrested and imprisoned. Freddie subsequently disappeared for six months . Spitz 2005 p. 27. Lennon 2005 p. 56: Alf admitted to her that he had planned to take John to live in New Zealand . Spitz 2005 p. 30: Julia went out of the door ... John ran after her . Lewisohn 2013 pp. 4142. Spitz 2005 p. 497. Lennon 2005 p. 56: Hard to see why Mimi wanted John as she had always said she didnt want children . Spitz 2005 p. 32: When he was old enough taught John how to solve crossword puzzles . Spitz 2005 p. 48: To get them started she applied the triad to Aint That a Shame . Sheff 2000 pp. 15859 16061. Spitz 2005 p. 32: Parkes recalled ... Leila and John to the cinema as often as three times a day . Harry 2009 . Harry 2000b p. 702. Harry 2000b p. 819. a b Harry 2000b p. 411. Spitz 2005 pp. 3233. Kenny Francis 11 July 2018. The Making of John Lennon . Indiana University Press. ISBN 978-1-68435-036-0 . Archived from the original on 12 April 2023 . Retrieved 25 February 2023 . Must Read Personalities A life Story of John Lennon . by Mocktime Publication. 5 June 2022. p. 10. Archived from the original on 12 April 2023 . Retrieved 19 March 2023 . Spitz 2005 p. 40. John Lennons First Album. Archived 2 January 2023 at the Wayback Machine Owen Edwards Smithsonian.com September 2005. Retrieved 17 September 2016. Spitz 2005 p. 45. Norman 2008 p. 89. Heichelbech Rose 19 December 2018. John Lennons Abysmal 1956 Report Card Shows Grades Arent Everything . Dusty Old Thing . Archived from the original on 3 December 2019 . Retrieved 3 October 2019 . Miles 1997 p. 48. MacDonald 2005 p. 326. MacDonald 2005 p. 327. Spitz 2005 p. 100. Harry 2000b pp. 553555. Lennon 2005 p. 50. Harry 2000b p. 738. Spitz 2005 p. 95. Spitz 2005 pp. 9399. Miles 1997 p. 44. Miles 1997 p. 32. Miles 1997 pp. 3839. Lennon 2005 p. 47. Harry 2000b pp. 337338. Miles 1997 pp. 47 50. Miles 1997 p. 47. Lennon 2005 p. 64. Miles 1997 p. 57. Lennon 2005 p. 53. Miles 1997 pp. 6667. Lennon 2005 p. 57. The Beatles 2000 p. 67. Frankel 2007 . a b Harry 2000b p. 721. Lewisohn 1988 pp. 2426: Twist and Shout which had to be recorded last because John Lennon had a particularly bad cold . Spitz 2005 p. 376: He had been struggling all day to reach notes but this was different this hurt . Doggett 2010 p. 33. Shennan 2007 . Coleman 1984a pp. 239240. London Gazette 1965 pp. 54875489. Coleman 1984a p. 288. Gould 2008 p. 268. Lawrence 2005 p. 62. The Beatles 2000 p. 171. Rodriguez 2012 pp. 5152. Harry 2000b p. 570. Cleave 2007 . Gould 2008 pp. 56 249 281 347. Hoppa 2010 . Gould 2008 p. 319. MacDonald 2005 p. 281. Time 1967 . Gould 2008 pp. 399400. Lewisohn 1988 p. 116. Schaffner 1978 p. 86. Wiener 1990 pp. 3940. BBC News 2007b . Brown 1983 p. 276. Miles 1997 pp. 349373. Logan 1967 . Lewisohn 1988 p. 131. Doggett 2010 pp. 33 34. Miles 1997 p. 397. Schaffner 1978 p. 89. Harry 2000b p. 31. Wiener 1990 p. 60. Fortnam Ian October 2014. You Say You Want a Revolution ... . Classic Rock . p. 46. Harry 2000b pp. 774775. TelegraphKlein 2010 . Miles 1997 p. 549: Paul never did sign the management contract . Fawcett 1976 p. 185. Coleman 1984a p. 279. Coleman 1984a pp. 4849. a b Perone 2001 pp. 5758. Harry 2000b pp. 160161. Harry 2000b pp. 276278. John Lennon MBE refusal letter valued at 60k . BBC News . Liverpool. 27 October 2016. Archived from the original on 27 October 2016 . Retrieved 27 October 2016 . Miles 2001 p. 360. a b Beatles fans call for return of MBE medal rejected by John Lennon . The Daily Telegraph . 2 August 2013. Archived from the original on 15 December 2013 . Retrieved 2 August 2013 . Having honours taken away forfeiture . GOV.UK . 30 September 2021 . Retrieved 10 January 2024 . Harry 2000b pp. 615617. Norman 2008 pp. 622624. Spitz 2005 pp. 85354. Loker 2009 p. 348. Wenner 2000 p. 32. Wenner 2000 p. 24. Playing the Governments Game: When It Comes to Violence We All Lose . HuffPost . 6 January 2016. Lennon John. Quote by John Lennon . Archived from the original on 12 November 2020 . Retrieved 10 October 2019 . a b Madinger Raille Lennonology Open Your Books 2015 ISBN 978-1-63110-175-5 Schaffner 1978 pp. 144 146. Harry 2000b pp. 640641. Riley 2002 p. 375. Schechter 1997 p. 106. Blaney 2005 pp. 7071. Wiener 1990 p. 157. Harry 2000b p. 382. a b Harry 2000b pp. 382383. Schaffner 1978 p. 146. Gerson 1971 . Vigilla 2005 . Goodman 1984 . a b Harry 2000b pp. 354356. Peebles 1981 p. 44. Sheff 2000 p. 210. Rodriguez 2010 pp. 4849. Badman 2001 p. 44. Allmusic 2010f . a b DeMain Bill. John Lennon and the FBI . Dangerous Liaisons: The FBI Files of Musicians . Performing Songwriter. Archived from the original on 17 January 2013 . Retrieved 19 January 2013 . a b Glenn 2009 . Wiener 1990 p. 204. a b BBC News 2006a . Rodriguez 2010 pp. 95 18082. Hunt Chris ed. 2005. NME Originals: Beatles The Solo Years 19701980 . London: IPC Ignite!. p. 65. Harry 2000b pp. 979980. Badman 2001 p. 81. Rodriguez 2010 pp. 5657. LennoNYC PBS Television 2010 a b Harry 2000b pp. 698699. White Dave. Lennons Lost Weekend Lover . About Classic Rock. Archived from the original on 7 February 2012 . Retrieved 9 June 2011 . Gleiberman Owen 11 June 2022. The Lost Weekend: A Love Story Review: May Pang Tells Her Story and a Piece of John Lennons in a Compelling Documentary . Variety . Retrieved 11 June 2022 . Jackson 2012 p. 97. Urish Bielen 2007 p. 47. Harry 2000b pp. 927929. Harry 2000b p. 735. The Very Best of Mick Jagger liner notes Badman 2001 1974. Spizer 2005 p. 59. Harry 2000b p. 284. Harry 2000b p. 970. Jones David Bowie A Life Windmill Books 2018 ISBN 978-1-78609-043-0 Cherry 2022 p. 137. Fame . John Lennon official website . Archived from the original on 28 June 2022 . Retrieved 5 July 2022 . Harry 2000b pp. 240 563. a b Harry 2000b p. 758. Madinger Eight Arms to Hold You 44.1 Publishing 2000 ISBN 0-615-11724-4 Sheff 2000 p. 4. Harry 2000b p. 553. Harry 2000b p. 166. Bennahum 1991 p. 87. Harry 2000b p. 814. BBC News 2006b . Lennon article circa 1980 Double Fantasy . Steve Hoffman Music Forums . Archived from the original on 2 August 2020 . Retrieved 29 August 2020 . John Lennon and sons double-fantasy trip . The Independent . 24 May 2013. Archived from the original on 13 June 2022. Neil Scott 22 June 2012. Yoko Ono thanks Bermuda for tribute to John Lennon The Royal Gazette:Bermuda News . The Royal Gazette . Archived from the original on 21 February 2020 . Retrieved 21 February 2020 . Schinder Schwartz 2007 p. 178. Ginell 2009 . Badman 2001 p. 268. Harry 2000b p. 145. Thiel Stacia 2 December 2005. Revolver . New York . Archived from the original on 17 October 2020 . Retrieved 17 October 2020 . Ingham 2006 p. 82. John Lennons Death: A Timeline of Events . Biography.com . 16 June 2020. Archived from the original on 8 December 2020 . Retrieved 29 December 2020 . Harry 2000b p. 692. a b Harry 2000b p. 510. Inmate Population Information Search . Nysdoccslookup.doccs.ny.gov. Archived from the original on 16 October 2014 . Retrieved 27 September 2014 . John Lennons Killer Mark David Chapman Denied Parole for the 12th Time . Rolling Stone . 12 September 2022. Archived from the original on 23 December 2022 . Retrieved 23 December 2022 . Badman 2001 p. 277. Badman 2001 p. 279. All The Number 1 Singles . The Official Charts Company . Archived from the original on 26 March 2021 . Retrieved 29 March 2021 . Lennon 2005 pp. 1723. Lennon 2005 p. 21. Lennon 2005 pp. 8995. Harry 2000b pp. 492493. Lennon 2005 p. 37. Lennon 2005 p. 38: After three months he phoned me and asked me to go back to him. It had taken him that long to pluck up the courage. He apologized for hitting me and said it would never happen again . Lennon 2005 p. 38: He was deeply ashamed of what he had done: I think he had been shocked to discover he had it in him to hit me. So although he was still verbally cutting and unkind he was never again physically violent to me. As we grew closer in the second phase of our romance even his verbal putdowns and attacks diminished . Sheff 2000 p. 182. Lennon 2005 p. 91. Harry 2000b pp. 493495. Lennon 2005 p. 113. Harry 2000b pp. 496497. Warner Brothers 1988 . Lennon 2005 pp. 211213. Lennon 2005 p. 213. Lennon 2005 pp. 214215: I was in shock ... It was clear that they had arranged for me to find them like that and the cruelty of Johns betrayal was hard to absorb I felt utterly humiliated and longed to disappear. ... Their intimacy had been so powerful that I had felt like a stranger in my own home . Lennon 2005 p. 221. Lennon 2005 p. 222: It was laughable. Roberto had been kind and a good friend but I had never been unfaithful to John. It was his attempt to make himself feel better about what he was doing . Lennon 2005 p. 229. Lennon 2005 pp. 305306: He had agreed that I should have custody of Julian He raised his offer to 100 000 . Harry 2000a p. 232. Harry 2000a pp. 1165 1169. Lennon 2005 pp. 94 119120. Harry 2000a p. 1169. a b Harry 2000b p. 232. Coleman 1992 pp. 298299. Norman 2008 p. 503. MacDonald 2005 p. 206. Harry 2000b p. 517. Harry 2000b p. 574. Harry 2000b p. 341. Pang 2008 back cover. Lennon 2005 pp. 252255. a b Lennon 2005 p. 258. Times Online 2009 . a b Sheff 2000 p. 63. Badman 2003 p. 393. Harry 2000b p. 682. Sheff 2000 p. 104. Apple. Yoko Ono. 1966 . Museum of Modern Art. Archived from the original on 13 January 2018 . Retrieved 11 January 2018 . Miles 2001 p. 246. Miles 1997 p. 272. Harry 2000b p. 683. Two Virgins liner notes Lennon 1978 p. 183. Spitz 2005 p. 800. Coleman 1992 p. 705. Kruse 2009 p. 16. Harry 2000b p. 276. Coleman 1992 p. 550. Norman 2008 p. 615 et seq. Emerick Massey 2006 pp. 279280. Sharing the Dakota With John Lennon . The New York Times . 6 December 2010. Archived from the original on 3 January 2022 . Retrieved 19 April 2019 . Harry 2000b p. 700. Harry 2000b pp. 700701. Harry 2000b pp. 535 690. Harry 2000b p. 535. a b Harry 2000b p. 195. Doggett 2010 pp. 24748. The Editors of Rolling Stone 2002 p. 146. Tillery 2011 p. 121. Harry 2000b p. 327. Harry 2000b pp. 934935. Sheff 2000 pp. 8182. Cohn 20102011 p. 95. a b Seaman 1991 p. 122. Sheff 2000 p. 82. Miles 2001 p. 337: They were ridiculed by the worlds media . Anderson 2010 p. 83: The bed-in stunt was ridiculed by the press . Harry 2000b pp. 745748. Holsinger 1999 p. 389. John Lennons Convey Greetings via Billboards The New York Times 16 December 1969: 54 Wenner 2000 p. 43. Clark 2002 . Miles 2001 p. 362. Hanratty: The damning DNA . BBC News . 10 May 2002. Archived from the original on 5 April 2014 . Retrieved 27 September 2014 . McGinty 2010 . Harry 2000b p. 344. Buchanan 2009 . Harry 2000b pp. 789790 812813. Calkin 2002 . Bright 2000 . Harry 2000b p. 403. John Lennons family hit the roof when funds were donated to IRA . independent . Archived from the original on 8 December 2022 . Retrieved 17 December 2022 . Wiener Jon 1984. Come Together John Lennon in His Time . University of Illinois Press. p. 159. Lennon John 8 December 2016. Quote by John Lennon . The Independent . Archived from the original on 24 June 2019 . Retrieved 25 June 2019 . Ali 2006 . Brooks 2005 . Lennon John. Richmond Len; Noguera Gary eds.. The Gay Liberation Book . Archived from the original on 8 December 2021 . Retrieved 8 December 2021 . Richmond Len. The gay liberation book by Len Richmond Reviews Discussion Bookclubs Lists . Goodreads.com. Archived from the original on 5 December 2013 . Retrieved 4 May 2013 . John Lennons last public political statement. Dynamic Tension . Crowdog89.tumblr.com. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013 . Retrieved 4 May 2013 . Wiener 1999 p. 2. BBC News 2000 . Wiener 1990 p. 225. Coleman 1992 pp. 576583. BBC News 2006c . Wiener Jon. Bob Dylans defense of John Lennon . Archived 2 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine The Nation 8 October 2010 Photo Copy of Bob Dylans 1972 Letter to the INS in Defense of John Lennon . Lennonfbifiles.com. Archived from the original on 13 July 2011 . Retrieved 8 December 2010 . Wiener 1999 p. 326. Harry 2000b p. 663. Urish Bielen 2007 p. 143. Harry 2000b p. 664. a b Coleman 1984a p. 289. Lavezzoli 2006 p. 196. Wiener 1999 p. 13. Friedman 2005 p. 252. Wiener v. F.B.I. 943 F.2d 972 9th Cir. 1991-07-12. Wiener 1999 p. 315. a b Wiener 1999 pp. 5254 76. Wiener 1999 p. 27. The Associated Press 2006 . Harry 2000b pp. 179181. Harry 2000b pp. 393394. Lewisohn 2000 p. 287. a b Harry 2000b pp. 396397. Oh! Calcutta! . specialsections.absoluteelsewhere.net. Archived from the original on 1 April 2015 . Retrieved 2 January 2015 . John Lennon and Yoko Ono launch art exhibition You Are Here . The Beatles Bible . 30 June 2018. Archived from the original on 19 February 2022 . Retrieved 19 February 2022 . John YokoPlastic Ono Band book by Yoko Ono and John Lennon published by Thames Hudson Ltd October 2020 pp. 196-199 John YokoPlastic Ono Band book by Yoko Ono and John Lennon published by Thames Hudson Ltd October 2020 pp. 202-203 John YokoPlastic Ono Band book by Yoko Ono and John Lennon published by Thames Hudson Ltd October 2020 pp. 200-201 Joint Yoko Ono John Lennon Fluxgroup Project Press Release -- April 1 1970 . Archived from the original on 21 January 2021 . Retrieved 15 January 2021 . John YokoPlastic Ono Band book by Yoko Ono and John Lennon published by Thames Hudson Ltd October 2020 pp. 212-213 John Lennon drawings go on show in New York . The Independent . 2 October 2012. Archived from the original on 13 June 2022. The Beatles Bible - John Lennons Bag One exhibition is raided by police . The Beatles Bible . 16 January 1970. Archived from the original on 19 February 2022 . Retrieved 19 February 2022 . French Philip 4 July 2009. John Lennons rise and fall . The Observer . ISSN 0029-7712 . Retrieved 12 July 2023 . Show: The Magazine of Films and the Arts . H R Publications. January 1970. p. 50. Archived from the original on 17 April 2023 . Retrieved 19 February 2022 . Doggett Peter 17 December 2009. The Art and Music of John Lennon . Omnibus Press. pp. 230. ISBN 978-0-85712-126-4 . Archived from the original on 17 April 2023 . Retrieved 19 February 2022 . Oh Yoko: Four by Yoko Ono . Cinema Project . Archived from the original on 9 March 2011 . Retrieved 15 October 2014 . Erection John Lennon Yoko Ono 1971 . Postiar . Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 15 October 2014 . Levitz Tamara 2004. Yoko Ono and the Unfinished Music of John Yoko: Imagining Gender and Racial Equality in the Late 1960s . In Bloch Avital H.; Umansky Lauri eds.. Impossible to hold : women and culture in the 1960s . New York: New York University Press. p. 233. ISBN 0814799108 . Harry 2000b p. 313. Harry 2000b pp. 738740. Prown and Newquist 2003 p. 213. Lawrence 2009 p. 27. Appleford Steve 6 August 2010. Yoko Ono Discusses New John Lennon Documentary . Rolling Stone . Archived from the original on 14 June 2017. Everett 1999 p. 297. Blaney 2005 p. 83. Everett 2001 p. 200. Babiuk 2002 pp. 164165. . ru.euronews.com in Russian. 30 May 2024 . Retrieved 6 June 2024 . Evans Mike ed. 2014. The Beatles: Paperback Writer: 40 Years of Classic Writing . Plexus Publishing. ISBN 978-0-8596-589-66 . Archived from the original on 17 April 2023 . Retrieved 28 October 2020 . Wenner 2000 p. 14. Miles 2001 p. 90. Coleman 1992 pp. 369370. Andrews Travis 3 October 2018. He did the impossible and made John Lennon sound like the Dalai Lama . The Washington Post . Hodenfield Chris 15 July 1976. George Martin Recalls the Boys in the Band . Rolling Stone . Retrieved 1 June 2024 . Gregory 2007 p. 75. Wiener 1990 p. 143. Ryan 1982 pp. 118 241. Wiener 1990 p. 35. Urish Bielen 2007 p. 123. Schinder Schwartz 2007 p. 160. a b Petridis Alexis 2 November 2023. The Beatles: Now and Then review final song is a poignant act of closure . The Guardian . Retrieved 6 November 2023 . Brandle Lars 13 November 2023. The Beatles Blast to No. 1 in U.K. With Now and Then . Billboard . Retrieved 15 November 2023 . a b BMI Foundations John Lennon Scholarships . Archived from the original on 15 February 2017. Wiener 2006 . Urish Bielen 2007 pp. 121122. Odriozola Amaia 3 March 2024. The Meaning of Lennons Disobedient Glasses Which Are Beloved by Everyone from Denzel Washington to Harry Potter . El Pais . Retrieved 16 August 2024 . Exclusive: John Lennon Yoko Ono Catalogs Sign With Downtown Music Publishing . Billboard . 25 January 2013. Archived from the original on 24 September 2016 . Retrieved 26 July 2016 . Recent History and Current Developments . Friends of Liverpool Airport. Archived from the original on 24 June 2012 . Retrieved 10 February 2013 . Monument to John Lennon unveiled in Liverpool on his 70th birthday . The Daily Telegraph . London. 9 October 2010. Archived from the original on 19 October 2015. Unveiling of Peace Harmony European Peace Monument Dedicated to John Lennon . 8 November 2010. Archived from the original on 1 July 2013 . Retrieved 10 July 2013 via YouTube. Mercury Crater Named After John Lennon . Space.com. 20 December 2013. Archived from the original on 14 January 2014 . Retrieved 13 January 2014 . She has one job: Guard John Lennons glasses . CNN. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 12 April 2023 . Allmusic 2010a . Most No. 1s By Artist All-Time . Billboard . Archived from the original on 22 February 2014 . Retrieved 18 December 2014 . Allmusic 2010e . Allmusic 2010c . Allmusic 2010d . RIAA 2010b . Greenberg 2010 p. 202. RIAA 2010a . Brit Awards 1982 . BBC News 2002 . Browne 2008 . a b Rolling Stone 2008 . Rolling Stone 2003 . Queens honours: People who have turned them down named . BBC News . 26 January 2012. Archived from the original on 12 May 2015 . Retrieved 27 September 2014 . London Gazette 1965 p. 5488. Songwriters Hall of Fame 2015 . The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum 1994 . Sources Ali Tariq 20 December 2006. John Lennon the FBI and me . The Guardian . UK. Archived from the original on 20 October 2013 . Retrieved 18 August 2010 . David Bowie Billboard Singles . AllMusic. Archived from the original on 19 November 2010 . Retrieved 13 November 2010 . Elton John Billboard Singles . AllMusic. Archived from the original on 7 January 2011 . Retrieved 13 November 2010 . John Lennon Billboard Singles . AllMusic. Archived from the original on 17 April 2023 . Retrieved 13 November 2010 . John Lennon Discography Singles EPs Happy Xmas War is Over . AllMusic. Archived from the original on 23 September 2010 . Retrieved 13 November 2010 . Peter and Gordon Billboard Singles . AllMusic. Archived from the original on 17 April 2023 . Retrieved 13 November 2010 . The Beatles Billboard Singles . AllMusic. Archived from the original on 7 January 2011 . Retrieved 13 November 2010 . Anderson Jennifer Joline 2010. John Lennon: Legendary Musician Beatle . ABDO Publishing Company. ISBN 978-1-60453-790-1 . Retrieved 24 July 2011 . Babiuk Andy 2002. Beatles Gear . Backbeat. ISBN 978-0-87930-731-8 . Badman Keith 2001. The Beatles Diary Volume 2 : After the Break-Up 19702001 . Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-0-7119-8307-6 . Badman Keith 2003. The Beatles Off The Record: The Dream Is Over . Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-0-7119-9199-6 . Archived from the original on 17 April 2023 . Retrieved 16 November 2015 . 100 great British heroes . BBC News . 21 August 2002. Archived from the original on 1 January 2016 . Retrieved 11 May 2010 . 1969: Millions march in US Vietnam Moratorium . BBC News . 2008. Archived from the original on 14 February 2018 . Retrieved 11 May 2010 . The Beatles in Bangor . BBC News . Archived from the original on 25 November 2015 . Retrieved 18 December 2014 . Judge releases Lennon letters . BBC News . 19 February 2000. Archived from the original on 11 August 2011 . Retrieved 11 May 2010 . Lennon filmmakers credit campaign . BBC News . 12 October 2006. Archived from the original on 6 October 2007 . Retrieved 11 May 2010 . Lennon ship log book up for sale . BBC News . 27 March 2006. Archived from the original on 27 April 2021 . Retrieved 11 May 2010 . The LennonMcCartney Songwriting Partnership . BBC News . 4 November 2005. Archived from the original on 30 September 2011 . Retrieved 22 December 2019 . US chat show veteran Douglas dies . BBC News . 12 August 2006. Archived from the original on 5 March 2021 . Retrieved 11 May 2010 . Lennon killer is denied parole for the sixth time . BBC News . 7 September 2010. Archived from the original on 7 September 2010 . Retrieved 8 September 2010 . Bennahum David 1991. The Beatles After the Break-Up: In Their Own Words . Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-0-7119-2558-8 . Archived from the original on 17 April 2023 . Retrieved 16 November 2015 . Blaney John 2005. John Lennon: Listen to this Book . Paper Jukebox. ISBN 978-0-9544528-1-0 . Archived from the original on 17 April 2023 . Retrieved 16 November 2015 . Bright Martin 20 February 2000. Lennon aided IRA claims MI5 renegade . The Guardian . UK. Archived from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 10 May 2010 . Brooks Richard 13 June 2009. Julian Lennon gives family peace a chance . The Times . UK. Archived from the original on 17 June 2011 . Retrieved 10 May 2010 . Brooks Xan 23 September 2005. Lennon too stoned to be a revolutionary . The Guardian . UK. Archived from the original on 29 August 2013 . Retrieved 22 December 2010 . Brown Peter 1983. The Love You Make: An Insiders Story of The Beatles . McGraw Hill . ISBN 978-0-07-008159-8 . Browne Jackson 12 November 2008. 100 Greatest Singers of All Time . Rolling Stone . Archived from the original on 20 September 2010 . Retrieved 10 September 2010 . Buchanan Jason 2009. Overview of Twenty to Life: The Life and Times of John Sinclair . AllMovie. Archived from the original on 23 May 2009 . Retrieved 10 May 2010 . Calkin Graham 2002. Anthology . Graham Calkin. Archived from the original on 14 May 2011 . Retrieved 9 December 2010 . Cherry Ava 2022. All That Glitters . Aquarius Press. ISBN 978-1-73676-776-4 . Archived from the original on 12 April 2023 . Retrieved 25 January 2022 . Clark Neil 11 May 2002. Hanratty Deserved to Die . The Spectator . Archived from the original on 24 November 2015 . Retrieved 23 November 2015 . Cleave Maureen 5 October 2005. The John Lennon I Knew . The Daily Telegraph . London. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 28 March 2015 . Cohn Jonathan. The Lost Lennon Tapes . Rolling Stone . No. 11201121. 23 December 2010 6 January 2011. Coleman Ray 1984. John Winston Lennon . Sidjwick Jackson. ISBN 978-0-283-98942-1 . Coleman Ray 1984. John Ono Lennon: Volume 2 19671980 . Sidgwick Jackson. ISBN 978-0-283-99082-3 . Coleman Ray 1992. Lennon: The Definitive Biography . Harper . ISBN 978-0-06-098608-7 . Deming Mark 2008. Overview of John Lennon: Live in New York City . AllMovie. Archived from the original on 25 June 2009 . Retrieved 10 May 2010 . Doggett Peter 2010. You Never Give Me Your Money: The Beatles After the Breakup . HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-06-177446-1 . The Editors of Rolling Stone 2002. Harrison . New York NY: Rolling Stone Press. ISBN 978-0-7432-3581-5 . Edmondson Jacqueline 2010. John Lennon: A Biography . Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-313-37938-3 . Archived from the original on 17 April 2023 . Retrieved 16 November 2015 . Emerick Geoff ; Massey Howard 2006. Here There and Everywhere: My Life Recording the Music of the Beatles . Penguin Books . ISBN 978-1-59240-179-6 . Everett Walter 1999. The Beatles as Musicians: Revolver through the Anthology . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-512941-0 . Archived from the original on 21 January 2023 . Retrieved 16 November 2015 . Everett Walter 2001. The Beatles as Musicians: The Quarry Men through Rubber Soul . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-514104-7 . Retrieved 16 November 2015 . Fawcett Anthony 1976. John Lennon: One Day at a Time . Evergreen. ISBN 978-0-394-17754-0 . Frankel Glenn 26 August 2007. Nowhere Man p4 . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 6 November 2012 . Retrieved 10 May 2010 . Friedman John S. 2005. The Secret Histories: Hidden Truths that Challenged the Past and Changed the World . Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-312-42517-3 . Gerson Ben 28 October 1971. Imagine . Rolling Stone . Archived from the original on 12 September 2012 . Retrieved 12 November 2010 . Ginell Richard S. 2009. Milk and Honey Review . AllMusic. Archived from the original on 17 April 2023 . Retrieved 10 May 2010 . Glenn Alan 2009. The Day a Beatle Came to Town . The Ann Arbor Chronicle . Archived from the original on 14 November 2012 . Retrieved 9 December 2010 . Goldman Albert Harry 2001. The Lives of John Lennon . Chicago Review Press. ISBN 978-1-55652-399-1 . Goodman Joan December 1984. Playboy Interview with Paul and Linda McCartney . Playboy . Archived from the original on 31 May 2020 . Retrieved 24 February 2011 . Gould Jonathan 2008. Cant Buy Me Love: The Beatles Britain and America . Piatkus. ISBN 978-0-7499-2988-6 . Archived from the original on 17 April 2023 . Retrieved 4 October 2020 . Grammy Award Winners . National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on 1 May 2010 . Retrieved 28 April 2010 . http:www.grammy.comnomineessearch Archived 19 December 2015 at the Wayback Machine Gregory Chris 2007. Who Could Ask For More: Reclaiming The Beatles . The Plotted Plain Press. ISBN 978-0-9557512-0-2 . Archived from the original on 17 April 2023 . Retrieved 16 November 2015 . Greenberg Keith Elliot 2010. December 8 1980: The Day John Lennon Died . Backbeat Books. ISBN 978-0-87930-963-3 . Archived from the original on 17 April 2023 . Retrieved 16 November 2015 . Harry Bill 2000. The Beatles Encyclopedia: Revised and Updated . Virgin Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7535-0481-9 . Harry Bill 2000. The John Lennon Encyclopedia . Virgin. ISBN 978-0-7535-0404-8 . Harry Bill 2009. John Lennon and Blackpool . Mersey Beat . Archived from the original on 13 December 2010 . Retrieved 5 December 2010 . Holsinger M. Paul 1999. War and American popular culture: a historical encyclopedia Volume 1998 . Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-313-29908-7 . Hoppa Jocelyn 10 November 2010. Celluloid Heroes: John Lennon and How I Won the War . Crawdaddy! . Archived from the original on 21 November 2010 . Retrieved 15 November 2010 . Ingham Chris 2006. The Rough Guide to The Beatles . Rough Guides. ISBN 978-1-84353-720-5 . Jackson Andrew Grant 2012. Still the Greatest: The Essential Solo Beatles Songs . Lanham MD: Scarecrow Press. ISBN 978-0-8108-8222-5 . Kruse Robert J. II 2009. Geographies of John and Yokos 1969 Campaign for Peace: An Intersection of Celebrity Space Art and Activism . In Johansson Ola; Bell Thomas L. eds.. Sound Society and the Geography of Popular Music . Ashgate. pp. 1132. ISBN 978-0-7546-7577-8 . Landau Jon 3 January 1974. Mind games . Rolling Stone . Archived from the original on 19 November 2010 . Retrieved 12 November 2010 . Lavezzoli Peter 2006. The Dawn of Indian Music in the West . New York NY: Continuum. ISBN 0-8264-2819-3 . Lawrence Ken 2005. John Lennon: In His Own Words . Andrews McMeel Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7407-5477-7 . Archived from the original on 17 April 2023 . Retrieved 16 November 2015 . Lawrence Robb 2009. The Modern Era of the Les Paul Legacy: 19682008 . Hal Leonard. ISBN 978-1-4234-5531-8 . Lennon Cynthia 1978. A Twist of Lennon . Avon. ISBN 978-0-380-45450-1 . Lennon Cynthia 2005. John . Crown Publishers. ISBN 978-0-307-33855-6 . Lewisohn Mark 1988. The Beatles Recording Sessions . Harmony Books. ISBN 978-0-517-57066-1 . Lewisohn Mark 2000 1992. The Complete Beatles Chronicle: The Only Definitive Guide to the Beatles Entire Career . London: Hamlyn. ISBN 0-600-60033-5 . Lewisohn Mark 2013. The Beatles:All These Years Volume 1 . New York: Crown Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4000-8305-3 . Logan Nick 25 November 1967. Magical Mystery Tour . NME . UK. Loker Bradford E. 2009. History with the Beatles . Dog Ear Publishing. ISBN 978-1-60844-039-9 . Archived from the original on 17 April 2023 . Retrieved 16 November 2015 . Most Excellent Order of the British Empire . The London Gazette supplement . 4 June 1965. Archived from the original on 11 January 2009 . Retrieved 11 May 2010 . MacDonald Ian 2005. Revolution in the Head: The Beatles Records and the Sixties . Pimlico. ISBN 978-1-84413-828-9 . McGinty Stephen 12 August 2010. Jimmy Reid: A working-class hero and the saviour of Clyde yards . The Scotsman . UK . Retrieved 18 August 2010 . Miles Barry 1997. Paul McCartney: Many Years From Now . Henry Holt Company. ISBN 978-0-8050-5248-0 . Miles Barry 2001. The Beatles Diary Volume 1: The Beatles Years . London: Omnibus Press. ISBN 978-0-7119-8308-3 . Archived from the original on 17 April 2023 . Retrieved 4 October 2020 . Norman Philip 25 May 1981. A Talk with Yoko . New York . Archived from the original on 17 April 2023 . Retrieved 1 January 2016 . Norman Philip 2008. John Lennon: The Life . Ecco. ISBN 978-0-06-075401-3 . Retrieved 16 November 2015 . Pang May 2008. Instamatic Karma: Photographs of John Lennon . St. Martins Press . ISBN 978-0-312-37741-0 . Peebles Andy ; Lennon John; Ono Yoko 1981. The Lennon tapes: John Lennon and Yoko Ono in conversation with Andy Peebles 6 December 1980 . BBC. ISBN 978-0-563-17944-3 . Perone James E. 2001. Songs of the Vietnam Conflict . Greenwood Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-313-31528-2 . Archived from the original on 17 April 2023 . Retrieved 16 November 2015 . Prown Pete; Newquist Harvey P. 1997. Legends of Rock Guitar: The Essential Reference of Rocks Greatest Guitarists . Hal Leonard. ISBN 978-0-7935-4042-6 . Archived from the original on 17 April 2023 . Retrieved 4 October 2020 . RIAA: Searchable database . Recording Industry Association of America . 2010. Archived from the original on 26 June 2007 . Retrieved 21 February 2010 . RIAA Gold Platinum Top Selling Artists . Record Industry Association of America. Archived from the original on 25 July 2013 . Retrieved 5 March 2010 . Roberts David 2001. Guinness World Records: British Hit Singles 14th ed.. Guinness World Records . ISBN 978-0-85156-156-1 . Riley Tim 2001. Tell me why: a Beatles commentary . Da Capo Press. ISBN 978-0-306-81120-3 . Archived from the original on 17 April 2023 . Retrieved 16 November 2015 . Rodriguez Robert 2010. Fab Four FAQ 2.0: The Beatles Solo Years 19701980 . Milwaukee WI: Backbeat Books. ISBN 978-1-4165-9093-4 . Rodriguez Robert 2012. Revolver: How the Beatles Reimagined Rock n Roll . Milwaukee WI: Backbeat Books. ISBN 978-1-61713-009-0 . David Bowie . Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. 1996. Archived from the original on 11 June 2010 . Retrieved 10 May 2010 . The RS 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . Rolling Stone . 18 November 2003. Archived from the original on 18 December 2010 . Retrieved 28 April 2010 . 100 Greatest Artists of All Time . Rolling Stone . 12 April 2008. Archived from the original on 22 December 2010 . Retrieved 10 May 2010 . Ryan David Stuart 1982. John Lennons Secret . Kozmik Press Centre. ISBN 978-0-905116-08-2 . Archived from the original on 17 April 2023 . Retrieved 4 October 2020 . Schaffner Nicholas 1978. The Beatles Forever . New York NY: McGraw-Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-055087-2 . Schechter Danny 1997. The More You Watch the Less You Know: News WarsSubmerged HopesMedia Adventures . Seven Stories Press . ISBN 978-1-888363-80-7 . Schinder Scott; Schwartz Andy 2007. Icons of Rock: An Encyclopedia of the Legends Who Changed Music Forever . Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-33845-8 . Seaman Frederic 1991. The Last Days of John Lennon . Birch Lane Press. ISBN 978-1-55972-084-7 . Sheff David 2000 1981. All We Are Saying: The Last Major Interview with John Lennon and Yoko Ono . New York NY: St. Martins Press. ISBN 0-312-25464-4 . Shennan Paddy 26 November 2007. What will Liz think of these? . The Liverpool Echo . Archived from the original on 16 October 2012 . Retrieved 10 May 2010 . Songwriters Hall of Fame 2015. John Lennon . Archived from the original on 24 April 2012 . Retrieved 23 November 2015 . Spizer Bruce 2005. The Beatles Solo on Apple Records . New Orleans LA: 498 Productions. ISBN 978-0-9662649-5-1 . Spitz Bob 2005. The Beatles: The Biography . Little Brown. ISBN 978-0-316-80352-6 . Other noises Other notes . Time . 3 March 1967. Archived from the original on 20 February 2008 . Retrieved 27 November 2010 . The Beatles 2000. The Beatles Anthology . Chronicle Books. ISBN 978-0-8118-2684-6 . The Brits 1982 . The Brit Awards. Archived from the original on 3 August 2019 . Retrieved 19 February 2016 . John Lennon . The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. 1994. Archived from the original on 30 December 2010 . Retrieved 10 May 2010 . Celebrity Obituaries Allen Klein . The Telegraph . 5 July 2009. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 5 December 2010 . FBI Releases Last Pages From Lennon File . The Washington Post . 20 December 2006. Archived from the original on 3 March 2022 . Retrieved 11 May 2010 . Tillery Gary 2011. Working Class Mystic: A Spiritual Biography of George Harrison . Wheaton IL: Quest Books. ISBN 978-0-8356-0900-5 . Urish Ben; Bielen Kenneth G 2007. The Words and Music of John Lennon . Praeger. ISBN 978-0-275-99180-7 . Archived from the original on 17 April 2023 . Retrieved 16 November 2015 . Vigilla Hubert 29 August 2005. Album Review : John Lennon Imagine . Treble . Archived from the original on 6 October 2014 . Retrieved 2 October 2014 . Wald Jonathan 6 October 2004. Lennon killer denied parole . CNN. Archived from the original on 5 March 2021 . Retrieved 11 May 2010 . Warner Brothers . John Lennon: Imagine Cynthia Lennon Interview DVD. Warner Brothers. 1988. Wenner Jann S 2000. Lennon Remembers . Verso. ISBN 978-1-85984-600-1 . Archived from the original on 17 April 2023 . Retrieved 16 November 2015 . Wiener Jon 1990. Come Together: John Lennon in His Time . University of Illinois Press . ISBN 978-0-252-06131-8 . Wiener Jon 1999. Gimme Some Truth: The John Lennon FBI Files . University of California Press . ISBN 978-0-520-22246-5 . Retrieved 16 November 2015 . Wiener Jon 19 December 2006. He didnt have to do it. Thats one reason hes still admired . The Guardian . UK. Archived from the original on 16 October 2022 . Retrieved 18 August 2010 . Further reading Kane Larry 2007. Lennon Revealed . Running Press. ISBN 978-0-7624-2966-0 Madinger Chip; Raile Scott 2015. Lennonology Strange Days Indeed A Scrapbook of Madness . Chesterfield MO: Open Your Books LLC. ISBN 978-1-63110-175-5 . Pang May; Edwards Henry 1983. Loving John: The Untold Story . Warner Books. ISBN 0-446-37916-6 . Prato Greg 2020. John Winston Ono Lennon . Kindle Direct. ISBN 979-8-6983-2911-4 Riley Tim 2011. Lennon: Man Myth Music . Hyperion. ISBN 978-1-4013-2452-0 Wiener Jon. The John Lennon FBI Files Archived 12 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine Yorke Richard 1969. John Lennon: Ringos Right We Cant Tour Again New Musical Express 7 June 1969 reproduced by Crawdaddy! 2007. Burger Jeff ed: Lennon on Lennon: Conversations With John Lennon 2017 Chicago Review Press ISBN 978-1-61374-824-4 External links John Lennon at AllMusic John Lennon in the Hollywood Walk of Fame Directory John Lennon . Rock and Roll Hall of Fame . John Lennon at IMDb John Lennon at the TCM Movie Database BBC Archive on John Lennon NPR Archive on John Lennon FBI file on John Lennon John Lennon hosted by EMI Group Limited Portals : Biography Film Music Rock music Television John Lennon at Wikipedias sister projects : Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote v t e John Lennon Discography Instruments Jukebox Song list Death Studio albums John LennonPlastic Ono Band Imagine Mind Games Walls and Bridges Rock n Roll with Yoko Ono Unfinished Music No. 1: Two Virgins Unfinished Music No. 2: Life with the Lions Wedding Album Some Time in New York City Double Fantasy Milk and Honey Live albums Live Peace in Toronto 1969 Live Jam Live in New York City Compilations Hits Shaved Fish The John Lennon Collection Lennon Legend: The Very Best of John Lennon Instant Karma: All-Time Greatest Hits Working Class Hero: The Definitive Lennon Power to the People: The Hits Icon Themed Menlove Ave. Wonsaponatime Acoustic Peace Love Truth Box sets Lennon John Lennon Anthology John Lennon Signature Box Gimme Some Truth Gimme Some Truth. The Ultimate Mixes Video The John Lennon Video Collection Lennon Legend: The Very Best of John Lennon Books In His Own Write A Spaniard in the Works Skywriting by Word of Mouth Films Self-Portrait 1969 Apotheosis 1970 Fly 1970 Erection 1971 Up Your Legs Forever 1971 Live in New York City 1972 Imagine 1972 Bootlegs A Toot and a Snore in 74 S.I.R. John Winston Ono Lennon Associates The Quarrymen The Beatles Plastic Ono Band David Peel The Lower East Side Band The Dirty Mac May Pang Harry Nilsson John Sinclair Rosaura Lopez Fictionalised Chapter 27 In His Life: The John Lennon Story John and Yoko: A Love Story The Killing of John Lennon Lennon Naked Birth of the Beatles Nowhere Boy Backbeat Two of Us The Lennon Report Living Is Easy with Eyes Closed Yesterday Tributes and memorials The 30th Annual John Lennon Tribute: Live from the Beacon Theatre NYC All Those Years Ago Come Together: A Night for John Lennons Words and Music Empty Garden Hey Hey Johnny Here Today Imagine Peace Tower The Immigrant Instant Karma: The Amnesty International Campaign to Save Darfur John Lennon Art and Design Building John Lennon Museum John Lennon Park John Lennon Peace Monument John Lennon Educational Tour Bus The Late Great Johnny Ace Lennon musical Lennon Bermuda Lennon Wall Life Is Real Song for Lennon Liverpool John Lennon Airport Non-Violence Strawberry Fields Roll On John Working Class Hero: A Tribute to John Lennon Related media Imagine: John Lennon soundtrack I Met the Walrus John book John Yoko: Above Us Only Sky Lennon Remembers LennoNYC The Lives of John Lennon The Lost Lennon Tapes Marx Lennon: The Parallel Sayings Nowhere Man: The Final Days of John Lennon The Pope Smokes Dope Pussy Cats The Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus Roots: John Lennon Sings the Great Rock Roll Hits Thats My Life My Love and My Home The U.S. vs. John Lennon soundtrack Other topics 251 Menlove Avenue Kenwood Tittenhurst Park The Dakota Bagism Bed-in Imagine Piano Peace Project John Lennon Artificial Intelligence Project John Lennon UFO incident LennonMcCartney LennonOno Grant for Peace Mark David Chapman More popular than Jesus Nutopia Toronto Rock and Roll Revival Sweet Toronto Psychedelic Rolls-Royce 4147 Lennon Category v t e John Lennon singles discography Lifetime 1969 Give Peace a Chance Remember Love Ono Cold Turkey Dont Worry Kyoko Mummys Only Looking for Her Hand in the Snow Ono 1970 Instant Karma! Who Has Seen the Wind? Ono Mother Why Ono 1971 Power to the People Open Your Box Ono UK Power to the People Touch Me Ono US Imagine Its So Hard US Happy Xmas War Is Over Listen the Snow Is Falling Ono 1972 Woman Is the Nigger of the World Sisters O Sisters Ono 1973 Mind Games Meat City 1974 Whatever Gets You thru the Night Beef Jerky 9 Dream What You Got Ya Ya Be-Bop-a-Lula Germany only 1975 Stand by Me Move Over Ms. L Imagine Working Class Hero UK 1977 Stand by Me Woman Is the Nigger of the World reissue US 1980 Just Like Starting Over Kiss Kiss Kiss Ono Posthumous 1981 Woman Beautiful Boys Ono Watching the Wheels Yes Im Your Angel Ono UK Watching the Wheels Beautiful Boy Darling Boy US 1982 Love Give Me Some Truth 1984 Nobody Told Me O Sanity Ono Borrowed Time Your Hands Ono Im Stepping Out Sleepless Night Ono Every Man Has a Woman Who Loves Him Its Alright Ono 1985 Jealous Guy Going Down on Love 1986 Rock and Roll People promo 1998 Im Losing You promo Awards for John Lennon v t e Academy Award for Best Original Score 1930s Louis Silvers 1934 Max Steiner 1935 Leo F. Forbstein 1936 Charles Previn 1937 Erich Wolfgang Korngold Alfred Newman 1938 Herbert Stothart Richard Hageman W. Franke Harling John Leipold and Leo Shuken 1939 1940s Leigh Harline Paul J. Smith and Ned Washington Alfred Newman 1940 Bernard Herrmann Frank Churchill and Oliver Wallace 1941 Max Steiner Ray Heindorf and Heinz Roemheld 1942 Alfred Newman Ray Heindorf 1943 Max Steiner Morris Stoloff and Carmen Dragon 1944 Miklos Rozsa Georgie Stoll 1945 Hugo Friedhofer Morris Stoloff 1946 Miklos Rozsa Alfred Newman 1947 Brian Easdale Johnny Green and Roger Edens 1948 Aaron Copland Roger Edens and Lennie Hayton 1949 1950s Franz Waxman Adolph Deutsch and Roger Edens 1950 Franz Waxman Johnny Green and Saul Chaplin 1951 Dimitri Tiomkin Alfred Newman 1952 Bronislau Kaper Alfred Newman 1953 Dimitri Tiomkin Adolph Deutsch and Saul Chaplin 1954 Alfred Newman Robert Russell Bennett Jay Blackton and Adolph Deutsch 1955 Victor Young Alfred Newman and Ken Darby 1956 Malcolm Arnold 1957 Dimitri Tiomkin Andre Previn 1958 Miklos Rozsa Andre Previn and Ken Darby 1959 1960s Ernest Gold Morris Stoloff and Harry Sukman 1960 Henry Mancini Saul Chaplin Johnny Green Sid Ramin and Irwin Kostal 1961 Maurice Jarre Ray Heindorf 1962 John Addison Andre Previn 1963 Richard M. Sherman and Robert B. Sherman Andre Previn 1964 Maurice Jarre Irwin Kostal 1965 John Barry Ken Thorne 1966 Elmer Bernstein Alfred Newman and Ken Darby 1967 John Barry Johnny Green 1968 Burt Bacharach Lennie Hayton and Lionel Newman 1969 1970s Francis Lai The Beatles John Lennon Paul McCartney George Harrison and Ringo Starr 1970 Michel Legrand John Williams 1971 Charlie Chaplin Raymond Rasch and Larry Russell Ralph Burns 1972 Marvin Hamlisch Marvin Hamlisch 1973 Nino Rota and Carmine Coppola Nelson Riddle 1974 John Williams Leonard Rosenman 1975 Jerry Goldsmith Leonard Rosenman 1976 John Williams Jonathan Tunick 1977 Giorgio Moroder Joe Renzetti 1978 Georges Delerue Ralph Burns 1979 1980s Michael Gore 1980 Vangelis 1981 John Williams Henry Mancini and Leslie Bricusse 1982 Bill Conti Michel Legrand Alan and Marilyn Bergman 1983 Maurice Jarre Prince 1984 John Barry 1985 Herbie Hancock 1986 Ryuichi Sakamoto David Byrne and Cong Su 1987 Dave Grusin 1988 Alan Menken 1989 1990s John Barry 1990 Alan Menken 1991 Alan Menken 1992 John Williams 1993 Hans Zimmer 1994 Luis Bacalov Alan Menken and Stephen Schwartz 1995 Gabriel Yared Rachel Portman 1996 James Horner Anne Dudley 1997 Nicola Piovani Stephen Warbeck 1998 John Corigliano 1999 2000s Tan Dun 2000 Howard Shore 2001 Elliot Goldenthal 2002 Howard Shore 2003 Jan A. P. Kaczmarek 2004 Gustavo Santaolalla 2005 Gustavo Santaolalla 2006 Dario Marianelli 2007 A. R. Rahman 2008 Michael Giacchino 2009 2010s Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross 2010 Ludovic Bource 2011 Mychael Danna 2012 Steven Price 2013 Alexandre Desplat 2014 Ennio Morricone 2015 Justin Hurwitz 2016 Alexandre Desplat 2017 Ludwig Goransson 2018 Hildur Gunadottir 2019 2020s Trent Reznor Atticus Ross and Jon Batiste 2020 Hans Zimmer 2021 Volker Bertelmann 2022 Ludwig Goransson 2023 v t e Grammy Award for Album of the Year 1950s The Music from Peter Gunn Henry Mancini 1958 Come Dance with Me! Frank Sinatra 1959 1960s The Button-Down Mind of Bob Newhart Bob Newhart 1960 Judy at Carnegie Hall Judy Garland 1961 The First Family Vaughn Meader 1962 The Barbra Streisand Album Barbra Streisand 1963 GetzGilberto Stan Getz Joao Gilberto 1964 September of My Years Frank Sinatra 1965 A Man and His Music Frank Sinatra 1966 Sgt. Peppers Lonely Hearts Club Band The Beatles 1967 By the Time I Get to Phoenix Glen Campbell 1968 Blood Sweat Tears Blood Sweat Tears 1969 1970s Bridge over Troubled Water Simon Garfunkel 1970 Tapestry Carole King 1971 The Concert for Bangladesh George Harrison Friends 1972 Innervisions Stevie Wonder 1973 Fulfillingness First Finale Stevie Wonder 1974 Still Crazy After All These Years Paul Simon 1975 Songs in the Key of Life Stevie Wonder 1976 Rumours Fleetwood Mac 1977 Saturday Night Fever Various Artists 1978 52nd Street Billy Joel 1979 1980s Christopher Cross Christopher Cross 1980 Double Fantasy John Lennon Yoko Ono 1981 Toto IV Toto 1982 Thriller Michael Jackson 1983 Cant Slow Down Lionel Richie 1984 No Jacket Required Phil Collins 1985 Graceland Paul Simon 1986 The Joshua Tree U2 1987 Faith George Michael 1988 Nick of Time Bonnie Raitt 1989 1990s Back on the Block Quincy Jones and Various Artists 1990 Unforgettable... with Love Natalie Cole 1991 Unplugged Eric Clapton 1992 The Bodyguard Whitney Houston 1993 MTV Unplugged Tony Bennett 1994 Jagged Little Pill Alanis Morissette 1995 Falling into You Celine Dion 1996 Time Out of Mind Bob Dylan 1997 The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill Lauryn Hill 1998 Supernatural Santana 1999 2000s Two Against Nature Steely Dan 2000 O Brother Where Art Thou? Various Artists 2001 Come Away with Me Norah Jones 2002 SpeakerboxxxThe Love Below Outkast 2003 Genius Loves Company Ray Charles Various Artists 2004 How to Dismantle an Atomic Bomb U2 2005 Taking the Long Way Dixie Chicks 2006 River: The Joni Letters Herbie Hancock 2007 Raising Sand Robert Plant Alison Krauss 2008 Fearless Taylor Swift 2009 2010s The Suburbs Arcade Fire 2010 21 Adele 2011 Babel Mumford Sons 2012 Random Access Memories Daft Punk 2013 Morning Phase Beck 2014 1989 Taylor Swift 2015 25 Adele 2016 24K Magic Bruno Mars 2017 Golden Hour Kacey Musgraves 2018 When We All Fall Asleep Where Do We Go? Billie Eilish 2019 2020s Folklore Taylor Swift 2020 We Are Jon Batiste 2021 Harrys House Harry Styles 2022 Midnights Taylor Swift 2023 v t e Grammy Award for Song of the Year 1950s Nel blu dipinto di blu Volare Domenico Modugno songwriter 1958 The Battle of New Orleans Jimmy Driftwood songwriter 1959 1960s Theme of Exodus Ernest Gold songwriter 1960 Moon River Johnny Mercer Henry Mancini songwriters 1961 What Kind of Fool Am I? Leslie Bricusse Anthony Newley songwriters 1962 Days of Wine and Roses Johnny Mercer Henry Mancini songwriters 1963 Hello Dolly! Jerry Herman songwriter 1964 The Shadow of Your Smile Paul Francis Webster Johnny Mandel songwriters 1965 Michelle John Lennon Paul McCartney songwriters 1966 Up Up and Away Jimmy Webb songwriter 1967 Little Green Apples Bobby Russell songwriter 1968 Games People Play Joe South songwriter 1969 1970s Bridge over Troubled Water Paul Simon songwriter 1970 Youve Got a Friend Carole King songwriter 1971 The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face Ewan MacColl songwriter 1972 Killing Me Softly with His Song Norman Gimbel Charles Fox songwriters 1973 The Way We Were Alan and Marilyn Bergman Marvin Hamlisch songwriters 1974 Send In the Clowns Stephen Sondheim songwriter 1975 I Write the Songs Bruce Johnston songwriter 1976 Evergreen Love Theme from A Star Is Born Barbra Streisand Paul Williams songwriters You Light Up My Life Joe Brooks songwriter 1977 Just the Way You Are Billy Joel songwriter 1978 What a Fool Believes Kenny Loggins Michael McDonald songwriters 1979 1980s Sailing Christopher Cross songwriter 1980 Bette Davis Eyes Donna Weiss Jackie DeShannon songwriters 1981 Always on My Mind Johnny Christopher Mark James Wayne Carson songwriters 1982 Every Breath You Take Sting songwriter 1983 Whats Love Got to Do with It Graham Lyle Terry Britten songwriters 1984 We Are the World Michael Jackson Lionel Richie songwriters 1985 Thats What Friends Are For Burt Bacharach Carole Bayer Sager songwriters 1986 Somewhere Out There James Horner Barry Mann Cynthia Weil songwriters 1987 Dont Worry Be Happy Bobby McFerrin songwriter 1988 Wind Beneath My Wings Larry Henley Jeff Silbar songwriters 1989 1990s From a Distance Julie Gold songwriter 1990 Unforgettable Irving Gordon songwriter 1991 Tears in Heaven Eric Clapton Will Jennings songwriters 1992 A Whole New World Alan Menken Tim Rice songwriters 1993 Streets of Philadelphia Bruce Springsteen songwriter 1994 Kiss from a Rose Seal songwriter 1995 Change the World Gordon Kennedy Wayne Kirkpatrick Tommy Sims songwriters 1996 Sunny Came Home Shawn Colvin John Leventhal songwriters 1997 My Heart Will Go On James Horner Will Jennings songwriters 1998 Smooth Itaal Shur Rob Thomas songwriters 1999 2000s Beautiful Day Adam Clayton David Evans Laurence Mullen Paul Hewson songwriters 2000 Fallin Alicia Keys songwriter 2001 Dont Know Why Jesse Harris songwriter 2002 Dance with My Father Richard Marx Luther Vandross songwriters 2003 Daughters John Mayer songwriter 2004 Sometimes You Cant Make It on Your Own Adam Clayton David Evans Laurence Mullen Paul Hewson songwriters 2005 Not Ready to Make Nice Emily Burns Erwin Martha Maguire Natalie Maines Pasdar Dan Wilson songwriters 2006 Rehab Amy Winehouse songwriter 2007 Viva la Vida Guy Berryman Jonathan Buckland William Champion Christopher Martin songwriters 2008 Single Ladies Put a Ring on It Thaddis Kuk Harrell Beyonce Knowles Terius Nash Christopher Stewart songwriters 2009 2010s Need You Now Dave Haywood Josh Kear Charles Kelley Hillary Scott songwriters 2010 Rolling in the Deep Adele Adkins Paul Epworth songwriters 2011 We Are Young Jack Antonoff Jeff Bhasker Andrew Dost Nate Ruess songwriters 2012 Royals Joel Little Ella Yelich OConnor songwriters 2013 Stay with Me Darkchild version James Napier William Phillips Sam Smith songwriters 2014 Thinking Out Loud Ed Sheeran Amy Wadge songwriters 2015 Hello Adele Adkins Greg Kurstin songwriters 2016 Thats What I Like Christopher Brody Brown James Fauntleroy Philip Lawrence Bruno Mars Ray Charles McCullough II Jeremy Reeves Ray Romulus Jonathan Yip songwriters 2017 This Is America Donald Glover Ludwig Goransson Jeffery Lamar Williams songwriters 2018 Bad Guy Billie Eilish OConnell Finneas OConnell songwriters 2019 2020s I Cant Breathe Dernst Emile II H.E.R. Tiara Thomas songwriters 2020 Leave the Door Open Brandon Anderson Christopher Brody Brown Dernst Emile II Bruno Mars songwriters 2021 Just Like That Bonnie Raitt songwriter 2022 What Was I Made For? Billie Eilish OConnell Finneas OConnell songwriters 2023 v t e Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media 1950s No Award 1958 Anatomy of a Murder Duke Ellington 1959 1960s Exodus Ernest Gold 1960 Breakfast at Tiffanys Henry Mancini 1961 No Award 1962 Tom Jones John Addison 1963 Mary Poppins Richard M. Sherman Robert B. Sherman 1964 The Sandpiper Johnny Mandel 1965 Doctor Zhivago Maurice Jarre 1966 Music from Mission: Impossible Lalo Schifrin 1967 The Graduate Dave Grusin Paul Simon 1968 Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid Burt Bacharach 1969 1970s Let It Be The Beatles John Lennon Paul McCartney George Harrison Ringo Starr 1970 Shaft Isaac Hayes 1971 The Godfather Nino Rota 1972 Jonathan Livingston Seagull Neil Diamond 1973 The Way We Were: Original Soundtrack Recording Alan and Marilyn Bergman Marvin Hamlisch 1974 Jaws John Williams 1975 Car Wash Norman Whitfield 1976 Star Wars John Williams 1977 Close Encounters of the Third Kind John Williams 1978 Superman John Williams 1979 1980s The Empire Strikes Back John Williams 1980 Raiders of the Lost Ark John Williams 1981 E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial John Williams 1982 Flashdance Michael Boddicker Irene Cara Kim Carnes Doug Cotler Keith Forsey Richard Gilbert Jerry Hey Duane Hitchings Craig Krampf Ronald Magness Dennis Matkosky Giorgio Moroder Phil Ramone Michael Sembello Shandi Sinnamon 1983 Purple Rain Prince and the Revolution 1984 Beverly Hills Cop Marc Benno Harold Faltermeyer Keith Forsey Micki Free John Gilutin Hawk Howard Hewett Bunny Hull Howie Rice Sharon Robinson Danny Sembello Sue Sheridan Richard Theisen Allee Willis 1985 Out of Africa John Barry 1986 The Untouchables Ennio Morricone 1987 The Last Emperor David Byrne Cong Su Ryuichi Sakamoto 1988 The Fabulous Baker Boys Dave Grusin 1989 1990s Glory James Horner 1990 Dances with Wolves John Barry 1991 Beauty and the Beast Alan Menken 1992 Aladdin Alan Menken 1993 Schindlers List John Williams 1994 Crimson Tide Hans Zimmer 1995 Independence Day David Arnold 1996 The English Patient Gabriel Yared 1997 Saving Private Ryan John Williams 1998 A Bugs Life Randy Newman 1999 2000s American Beauty Thomas Newman 2000 Crouching Tiger Hidden Dragon Tan Dun 2001 The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring Howard Shore John Kurlander engineermixer 2002 The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers Howard Shore John Kurlander engineermixer Peter Cobbin engineermixer 2003 The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King Howard Shore John Kurlander engineermixer Peter Cobbin engineermixer 2004 Ray Craig Armstrong 2005 Memoirs of a Geisha John Williams 2006 Ratatouille Michael Giacchino 2007 The Dark Knight Hans Zimmer James Newton Howard 2008 Up Michael Giacchino 2009 2010s Toy Story 3 Randy Newman 2010 The Kings Speech Alexandre Desplat 2011 The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo Trent Reznor Atticus Ross 2012 Skyfall Thomas Newman 2013 The Grand Budapest Hotel Alexandre Desplat 2014 Birdman Antonio Sanchez 2015 Star Wars: The Force Awakens John Williams 2016 La La Land Justin Hurwitz 2017 Black Panther Ludwig Goransson 2018 Chernobyl Hildur Gunadottir 2019 2020s Joker Hildur Gunadottir 2020 The Queens Gambit Carlos Rafael Rivera Soul Jon Batiste Trent Reznor Atticus Ross 2021 Encanto Germaine Franco 2022 Oppenheimer Ludwig Goransson 2023 v t e Grammy Award for Best Music Film 19831986 Duran Duran Duran Duran 1983 Making Michael Jacksons Thriller Michael Jackson 1984 Huey Lewis The News: The Heart of Rock n Roll Huey Lewis and the News 1985 Bring On the Night Sting 1986 Best Performance Music Video 19871988 The Princes Trust All-Star Rock Concert Various Artists 1987 Where the Streets Have No Name U2 1988 19892009 Rhythm Nation 1814 Janet Jackson 1989 Please Hammer Dont Hurt Em: The Movie MC Hammer 1990 Live! Blond Ambition World Tour 90 Madonna 1991 Diva Annie Lennox 1992 Ten Summoners Tales Sting 1993 Zoo TV: Live from Sydney U2 1994 Secret World Live Peter Gabriel 1995 The Beatles Anthology The Beatles 1996 Jagged Little Pill Live Alanis Morissette 1997 American Masters : Lou Reed: Rock Roll Heart Lou Reed 1998 Band of Gypsys: Live at Fillmore East Jimi Hendrix 1999 Gimme Some Truth: The Making of John Lennons Imagine Album John Lennon 2000 Recording The Producers: A Musical Romp with Mel Brooks Mel Brooks 2001 Westway to the World The Clash 2002 Legend Sam Cooke 2003 Concert for George Various Artists 2004 No Direction Home Bob Dylan 2005 Wings for Wheels: The Making of Born to Run Bruce Springsteen 2006 The Confessions Tour Madonna 2007 Runnin Down a Dream Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers 2008 The Beatles Love All Together Now The Beatles and Cirque du Soleil 2009 2010present When Youre Strange: A Film About The Doors The Doors 2010 Back and Forth Foo Fighters 2011 Big Easy Express Mumford Sons Edward Sharpe The Magnetic Zeros and Old Crow Medicine Show 2012 Live Kisses Paul McCartney 2013 20 Feet from Stardom Darlene Love Merry Clayton Lisa Fischer Judith Hill 2014 Amy Amy Winehouse 2015 The Beatles: Eight Days a Week - The Touring Years The Beatles 2016 The Defiant Ones Various Artists 2017 Quincy Quincy Jones 2018 Homecoming: A Film by Beyonce Beyonce 2019 Linda Ronstadt: The Sound of My Voice Linda Ronstadt 2020 Summer of Soul Various Artists 2021 Jazz Fest: A New Orleans Story Various Artists 2022 Moonage Daydream David Bowie 2023 v t e Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award 19631990 1963 Bing Crosby 1965 Frank Sinatra 1966 Duke Ellington 1967 Ella Fitzgerald 1968 Irving Berlin 1971 Elvis Presley 1972 Louis Armstrong Mahalia Jackson 1984 Chuck Berry Charlie Parker 1985 Leonard Bernstein 1986 Benny Goodman The Rolling Stones Andres Segovia 1987 Roy Acuff Benny Carter Enrico Caruso Ray Charles Fats Domino Woody Herman Billie Holiday B.B. King Isaac Stern Igor Stravinsky Arturo Toscanini Hank Williams 1989 Fred Astaire Pablo Casals Dizzy Gillespie Jascha Heifetz Lena Horne Leontyne Price Bessie Smith Art Tatum Sarah Vaughan 1990 Nat King Cole Miles Davis Vladimir Horowitz Paul McCartney 19912000 1991 Marian Anderson Bob Dylan John Lennon Kitty Wells 1992 James Brown John Coltrane Jimi Hendrix Muddy Waters 1993 Chet Atkins Little Richard Thelonious Monk Bill Monroe Pete Seeger Fats Waller 1994 Bill Evans Aretha Franklin Arthur Rubinstein 1995 Patsy Cline Peggy Lee Henry Mancini Curtis Mayfield Barbra Streisand 1996 Dave Brubeck Marvin Gaye Georg Solti Stevie Wonder 1997 Bobby Blue Bland The Everly Brothers Judy Garland Stephane Grappelli Buddy Holly Charles Mingus Oscar Peterson Frank Zappa 1998 Bo Diddley The Mills Brothers Roy Orbison Paul Robeson 1999 Johnny Cash Sam Cooke Otis Redding Smokey Robinson Mel Torme 2000 Harry Belafonte Woody Guthrie John Lee Hooker Mitch Miller Willie Nelson 20012010 2001 The Beach Boys Tony Bennett Sammy Davis Jr. Bob Marley The Who 2002 Count Basie Rosemary Clooney Perry Como Al Green Joni Mitchell 2003 Etta James Johnny Mathis Glenn Miller Tito Puente Simon Garfunkel 2004 Van Cliburn The Funk Brothers Ella Jenkins Sonny Rollins Artie Shaw Doc Watson 2005 Eddy Arnold Art Blakey The Carter Family Morton Gould Janis Joplin Led Zeppelin Jerry Lee Lewis Jelly Roll Morton Pinetop Perkins The Staple Singers 2006 David Bowie Cream Merle Haggard Robert Johnson Jessye Norman Richard Pryor The Weavers 2007 Joan Baez Booker T. the M.G.s Maria Callas Ornette Coleman The Doors The Grateful Dead Bob Wills 2008 Burt Bacharach The Band Cab Calloway Doris Day Itzhak Perlman Max Roach Earl Scruggs 2009 Gene Autry The Blind Boys of Alabama The Four Tops Hank Jones Brenda Lee Dean Martin Tom Paxton 2010 Leonard Cohen Bobby Darin David Honeyboy Edwards Michael Jackson Loretta Lynn Andre Previn Clark Terry 20112020 2011 Julie Andrews Roy Haynes Juilliard String Quartet The Kingston Trio Dolly Parton Ramones George Beverly Shea 2012 The Allman Brothers Band Glen Campbell Antonio Carlos Jobim George Jones The Memphis Horns Diana Ross Gil Scott-Heron 2013 Glenn Gould Charlie Haden Lightnin Hopkins Carole King Patti Page Ravi Shankar The Temptations 2014 The Beatles Clifton Chenier The Isley Brothers Kraftwerk Kris Kristofferson Armando Manzanero Maud Powell 2015 Bee Gees Pierre Boulez Buddy Guy George Harrison Flaco Jimenez The Louvin Brothers Wayne Shorter 2016 Ruth Brown Celia Cruz Earth Wind Fire Herbie Hancock Jefferson Airplane Linda Ronstadt Run-DMC 2017 Shirley Caesar Ahmad Jamal Charley Pride Jimmie Rodgers Nina Simone Sly Stone The Velvet Underground 2018 Hal Blaine Neil Diamond Emmylou Harris Louis Jordan The Meters Queen Tina Turner 2019 Black Sabbath George Clinton and Parliament-Funkadelic Billy Eckstine Donny Hathaway Julio Iglesias Sam Dave Dionne Warwick 2020 Chicago Roberta Flack Isaac Hayes Iggy Pop John Prine Public Enemy Sister Rosetta Tharpe 2021present 2021 Grandmaster Flash and the Furious Five Lionel Hampton Marilyn Horne Salt-N-Pepa Selena Talking Heads 2022 Bonnie Raitt 2023 Bobby McFerrin Nirvana Ma Rainey Slick Rick Nile Rodgers The Supremes Ann Wilson and Nancy Wilson 2024 Laurie Anderson The Clark Sisters Gladys Knight N.W.A Donna Summer Tammy Wynette v t e Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Class of 1988 Performers The Beach Boys Al Jardine Mike Love Brian Wilson Carl Wilson Dennis Wilson The Beatles George Harrison John Lennon Paul McCartney Ringo Starr The Drifters Ben E. King Rudy Lewis Clyde McPhatter Johnny Moore Bill Pinkney Charlie Thomas Gerhart Thrasher Bob Dylan The Supremes Florence Ballard Diana Ross Mary Wilson Early influences Woody Guthrie Lead Belly Les Paul Non-performers Ahmet Ertegun Award Berry Gordy v t e Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Class of 1994 Performers The Animals Eric Burdon Chas Chandler Alan Price John Steel Hilton Valentine The Band Rick Danko Levon Helm Garth Hudson Richard Manuel Robbie Robertson Duane Eddy Grateful Dead Tom Constanten Jerry Garcia Donna Jean Godchaux Keith Godchaux Mickey Hart Robert Hunter Bill Kreutzmann Phil Lesh Ron Pigpen McKernan Brent Mydland Bob Weir Vince Welnick Elton John John Lennon Bob Marley Rod Stewart Early influences Willie Dixon Non-performers Ahmet Ertegun Award Johnny Otis v t e The Beatles John Lennon Paul McCartney George Harrison Ringo Starr Outline of the Beatles The Beatles timeline Stuart Sutcliffe Pete Best Chas Newby Norman Chapman Tommy Moore Jimmie Nicol History The Quarrymen In Hamburg At the Cavern Club Decca audition North American releases Beatlemania More popular than Jesus In Bangor In India Break-up Murder of John Lennon Anthology Line-ups Religious views Timeline Lists Awards and nominations Bootlegs Albums Singles Films Instruments Live performances Performers Post-breakup collaborations Songs Cover versions of Beatles songs Songs covered by the Beatles Recording sessions Tributes Tours and performances 1960 Johnny Gentle Tour Winter 1963 Helen Shapiro Tour 1963 Roy Orbison Tour The Ed Sullivan Show appearances 1964 world tour The Beatles 1964 tour of Australia 1964 North American tour 1965 European tour 1965 US tour 1965 UK tour 1966 tour of Germany Japan and the Philippines 1966 US tour Our World performance Rooftop concert Personnel Management Neil Aspinall Tony Barrow Peter Brown Brian Epstein Mal Evans Dick James Freda Kelly Allen Klein Joseph Lockwood Alistair Taylor Derek Taylor Allan Williams Production Geoff Emerick Richard Lush George Martin Phil McDonald Billy Preston Ken Scott Tony Sheridan Phil Spector Norman Smith Associated companies Apple Corps Apple Records Capitol Records EMI Harrisongs Northern Songs Parlophone Seltaeb Startling Music Swan Records Tollie Records United Artists United Artists Records Vee-Jay Records Associated places 10 Admiral Grove 12 Arnold Grove 20 Forthlin Road 251 Menlove Avenue 34 Montagu Square Marylebone Abbey Road London Abbey Road Studios Ad Lib Club The Bag ONails Beatles Ashram Beatles-Platz Blue Angel Casbah Coffee Club Candlestick Park Carnegie Hall The Cavern Club Cavern Mecca Comiskey Park The Jacaranda Kaiserkeller Kinfauns London Palladium Penny Lane Liverpool 3 Savile Row The Scotch of St. James Shea Stadium St Peters Church Stanley Street Star-Club Strawberry Field Tittenhurst Park Top Ten Club Wigmore Street Selected books The Beatles Anthology The Beatles: The Authorised Biography The Beatles: All These Years A Cellarful of Noise I Me Mine Lennon Remembers Paul McCartney: Many Years from Now Other topics Apple Corps v Apple Computer Apple scruffs Beatle boot The Beatles at Abbey Road Beatlesque Beat music Cultural impact Fifth Beatle Global Beatles Day Images of a Woman LennonMcCartney Paul is dead Pop Go the Beatles Recording practices automatic double tracking The Beatles: Rock Band songs The Rutles Category v t e Plastic Ono Band John Lennon Yoko Ono Members 19691974 Eric Clapton Klaus Voormann Alan White Ringo Starr Delaney Bramlett Bonnie Bramlett Jim Gordon George Harrison Nicky Hopkins Bobby Keys Keith Moon Billy Preston Jim Price Hugh McCracken Stuart Scharf David Spinozza Kenneth Ascher Michael Brecker Arthur Jenkins David Friedman Pete Kleinow Don Brooks Jeremy Steig Jesse Ed Davis Eddie Mottau 2009present Sean Ono Lennon Cornelius Yuka Honda Michael Leonhart Erik Friedlander Albums Live Peace in Toronto 1969 John LennonPlastic Ono Band Yoko OnoPlastic Ono Band Some Time in New York City Approximately Infinite Universe Feeling the Space Mind Games Walls and Bridges Shaved Fish Live in New York City Dont Stop Me! Between My Head and the Sky The Flaming Lips with Yoko OnoPlastic Ono Band Take Me to the Land of Hell Singles Give Peace a Chance Remember Love Cold Turkey Dont Worry Kyoko Mummys Only Looking for Her Hand in the Snow Instant Karma! Who Has Seen the Wind? Mother Why Power to the People Open Your Box Power to the People Touch Me Happy Xmas War Is Over Listen the Snow Is Falling Woman Is the Nigger of the World Sisters O Sisters Now or Never Move on Fast Death of Samantha Yang Yang Mind Games Meat City Whatever Gets You thru the Night Beef Jerky 9 Dream What You Got Working Class Hero Related articles List of Plastic Ono Band line-ups Elephants Memory The Dirty Mac Toronto Rock and Roll Revival Sweet Toronto Category v t e John Lennon family Parents Alfred Lennon 19121976 Julia Lennon 19141958 Aunts and uncles George Toogood Smith 19031955 Mimi Smith 19061991 Half-sibling Julia Baird born 1947 Children Julian Lennon born 1963 Sean Lennon born 1975 Wives Cynthia Powell 19392015; married 19621968 Yoko Ono born 1933; married 1969 Relationships May Pang born 1950; partnered 19731975 v t e Yoko Ono Discography Songs Studio albums Yoko OnoPlastic Ono Band Fly Approximately Infinite Universe Feeling the Space Season of Glass Its Alright I See Rainbows Starpeace Rising A Story Blueprint for a Sunrise Between My Head and the Sky Yokokimthurston Take Me to the Land of Hell Warzone with Lennon Unfinished Music No. 1: Two Virgins Unfinished Music No. 2: Life with the Lions Wedding Album Some Time in New York City Double Fantasy Milk and Honey Live albums Live Peace in Toronto 1969 with The Plastic Ono Band Live Jam with Plastic Ono Band The Mothers of Invention Compilations Onobox Walking on Thin Ice Remix albums Yes Im a Witch Open Your Box Yes Im a Witch Too Other albums Every Man Has a Woman New York Rock Dont Stop Me! EP Singles Remember Love Dont Worry Kyoko Mummys Only Looking for a Hand in the Snow Who Has Seen the Wind? Why Open Your Box Touch Me Mrs. Lennon Midsummer New York Listen the Snow Is Falling Sisters O Sisters Now or Never Move on Fast Death of Samantha Yang Yang Woman Power Kiss Kiss Kiss Beautiful Boys Walking on Thin Ice Yes Im Your Angel No No No My Man Never Say Goodbye Hell in Paradise Open Your Box remixes Kiss Kiss Kiss remixes Yang Yang remixes Walking on Thin Ice remixes Hell in Paradise remixes Everyman... Everywoman... remixes Youre the One remixes No No No remixes Give Peace a Chance remixes Im Not Getting Enough remixes Give Me Something remixes Wouldnit Im a Star remixes Move on Fast remixes Talking to the Universe remixes She Gets Down on Her Knees remixes Im Moving On remixes Hold Me Walking on Thin Ice remixes Angel Woman Power remixes Books Grapefruit 1964 Acorn 2013 Films Self-Portrait 1969 Apotheosis 1970 Fly 1970 Freedom 1970 Up Your Legs Forever 1971 Imagine 1972 Art Voice Piece for Soprano 1961 Cut Piece 1964 Apple 1966 Ceiling PaintingYes Painting 1966 Half-A-Room 1967 Wish Tree c.1981; ongoing Wish Tree for Washington DC Family Toshi Ichiyanagi first husband Anthony Cox second husband John Lennon third husband Sean Lennon son Yasuda Zenjiro great-grandfather Related Toronto Rock and Roll Revival Sweet Toronto John and Yoko: A Love Story John Yoko: Above Us Only Sky Bagism Bed-in Give Peace a Chance Imagine Nutopia Artists Against Fracking LennonOno Grant for Peace The Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus Murder of John Lennon Imagine Peace Tower Courage Award for the Arts The Dakota Tittenhurst Park Category v t e Julian Lennon Studio albums Valotte The Secret Value of Daydreaming Mr. Jordan Help Yourself Photograph Smile Everything Changes Jude Singles Too Late for Goodbyes Valotte Because Stick Around Saltwater Lucy Someday Related articles Albums Dave Clarks Time Mike Batts The Hunting of the Snark Mr. Hollands Opus Soundtrack Family John Lennon father Cynthia Lennon mother Sean Lennon half-brother People Yoko Ono Phil Ramone Mark Spiro Other Discography v t e Sean Lennon Studio albums Into the Sun 1998 Friendly Fire 2006 Extended plays Half Horse Half Musician 1999 Related The Ghost of a Saber Tooth Tiger Cibo Matto Charlotte Kemp Muhl Dopo Yume The Claypool Lennon Delirium Monolith of Phobos South of Reality John Lennon father Yoko Ono mother Julian Lennon brother Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST 2 WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Russia Spain Romania Portugal Netherlands Norway Taiwan Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii 2 ORCID Scopus Artists ULAN MusicBrainz RKD Artists Museum of Modern Art Grammy Awards People Trove Deutsche Biographie Deutsche Synchronkartei Other IdRef NARA SNAC Te Papa New Zealand RISM Retrieved from https:en.wikipedia.orgwindex.php?titleJohnLennonoldid1249559916 Categories : John Lennon 1940 births 1980 deaths 1980 murders in the United States 20th-century British guitarists 20th-century British pianists 20th-century English male actors 20th-century English male singers 20th-century English singers 20th-century English singer-songwriters Alumni of Liverpool College of Art Apple Records artists Atco Records artists Beat musicians Best Original Music Score Academy Award winners Brit Award winners British harmonica players English male pianists Capitol Records artists COINTELPRO targets British critics of religions British nonviolence advocates Counterculture of the 1960s Counterculture of the 1970s Deaths by firearm in Manhattan English anti-war activists English emigrants to the United States English expatriate musicians in the United States English experimental musicians English male film actors English male guitarists English male singer-songwriters English murder victims English pacifists English people convicted of drug offences English people murdered abroad English people of Irish descent English pop guitarists English pop pianists English male pop singers English rock guitarists English rock pianists English rock keyboardists English pop keyboardists English male rock singers English pop rock singers English socialists Geffen Records artists Grammy Award winners Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award winners Ivor Novello Award winners Juno Award for International Album of the Year winners Lennon family Male actors from Liverpool Members of the Order of the British Empire Musicians from Liverpool Parlophone artists People educated at Quarry Bank High School People from Woolton People murdered in New York City Plastic Ono Band members Political music artists Polydor Records artists British rhythm guitarists The Beatles members The Dirty Mac members The Quarrymen members Transcendental Meditation exponents Writers who illustrated their own writing Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Russian-language sources ru Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Featured articles Use British English from March 2024 Use dmy dates from March 2024 Articles with hCards Biography with signature Articles with hAudio microformats Turner Classic Movies person ID same as Wikidata TCMDb name template using numeric ID This page was last edited on 5 October 2024 at 15:16 UTC . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view