John F. Kennedy - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Donate Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 1 Early life and education 2 U.S. Naval Reserve 19411945 Toggle U.S. Naval Reserve 19411945 subsection 2.1 Commanding PT-109 and PT-59 3 Journalism 1945 4 U.S. House of Representatives 19471953 5 U.S. Senate 19531960 6 1960 presidential election 7 Presidency 19611963 Toggle Presidency 19611963 subsection 7.1 Foreign policy 7.1.1 Cold War and flexible response 7.1.2 Decolonization and the Congo Crisis 7.1.3 Peace Corps 7.1.4 Vienna Summit and the Berlin Wall 7.1.5 Bay of Pigs Invasion 7.1.6 Operation Mongoose 7.1.7 Cuban Missile Crisis 7.1.8 Latin America and communism 7.1.9 Laos 7.1.10 Vietnam 7.1.11 West Berlin speech 7.1.12 Middle East 7.1.13 Ireland 7.1.14 American University speech 7.1.15 Nuclear Test Ban Treaty 7.2 Domestic policy 7.2.1 New Frontier 7.2.2 Taxes 7.2.3 Economy 7.2.4 Civil rights movement 7.2.5 Status of women 7.2.6 Crime 7.2.7 Agriculture 7.2.8 Native American relations 7.2.9 Space policy 7.3 Judicial appointments 8 Assassination Toggle Assassination subsection 8.1 Funeral 9 Personal life family and reputation Toggle Personal life family and reputation subsection 9.1 Wife and children 9.2 Popular image 9.3 Health 9.4 Affairs and friendships 9.5 Sports 9.6 Religion 10 Historical evaluations and legacy Toggle Historical evaluations and legacy subsection 10.1 Presidency 10.1.1 Camelot 10.2 Memorials and eponyms 11 Works Toggle Works subsection 11.1 Books 11.2 Select speeches 12 See also 13 Notes 14 References Toggle References subsection 14.1 Citations 14.2 Works cited 15 Further reading 16 External links Toggle the table of contents John F. Kennedy 171 languages Aceh Afrikaans Alemannisch Anaraskiela nglisc Aragones Arpetan Asturianu Avanee Aymar aru Azrbaycanca Basa Bali Ban-lam-gu Bikol Central Bislama Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Catala Cebuano Cestina Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Emilian e rumagnol Espanol Esperanto Euskara Froyskt Francais Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gaidhlig Galego Goychi Konknni Gungbe Hak-ka-ngi Hausa Hawaii Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue IsiZulu Islenska Italiano Jawa Kapampangan Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Kiswahili Kreyol ayisyen Kurdi Latina Latviesu Letzebuergesch Lietuviu Ligure Limburgs Lingala Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Malagasy Bahasa Melayu Ming-deng-ngu Nederlands Nordfriisk Norsk bokmal Norsk nynorsk Occitan Ozbekcha Pangcah Papiamentu Piemonteis Plattduutsch Polski Portugues Qaraqalpaqsha Qrmtatarca Ripoarisch Romana Rumantsch Runa Simi Sakizaya Scots Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovencina Slovenscina srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Svenska Tagalog tatarca Turkce Turkmence Uyghurche Tieng Viet Volapuk Winaray Yoruba Zazaki Zeeuws Zemaiteska Tolsi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia President of the United States from 1961 to 1963 Several terms redirect here. For other uses see John Kennedy disambiguation Jack Kennedy disambiguation JFK disambiguation and John F. Kennedy disambiguation . John F. Kennedy Oval Office portrait 1963 35th President of the United States In office January 20 1961 November 22 1963 Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson Preceded by Dwight D. Eisenhower Succeeded by Lyndon B. Johnson United States Senator from Massachusetts In office January 3 1953 December 22 1960 Preceded by Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. Succeeded by Benjamin A. Smith II Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Massachusettss 11th district In office January 3 1947 January 3 1953 Preceded by James Michael Curley Succeeded by Tip ONeill Personal details Born John Fitzgerald Kennedy 1917-05-29 May 29 1917 Brookline Massachusetts U.S. Died November 22 1963 1963-11-22 aged 46 Dallas Texas U.S. Manner of death Assassination Resting place Arlington National Cemetery Political party Democratic Spouse Jacqueline Bouvier m. 1953 Children 4 including Caroline John Jr. and Patrick Parents Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. Rose Fitzgerald Relatives Kennedy family Bouvier family by marriage Education Harvard University AB Signature Military service Allegiance United States Branchservice United States Navy Years of service 19411945 Rank Lieutenant Unit Motor Torpedo Squadron 2 Patrol Torpedo Boat 109 Patrol Torpedo Boat 59 Battleswars World War II Solomon Islands campaign Awards Navy and Marine Corps Medal Purple Heart American Defense Service Medal American Campaign Medal AsiaticPacific Campaign Medal with 3 service stars World War II Victory Medal 1 John F. Kennedys voice Kennedys speech at Rice University proposing that a man should be landed on the Moon . Recorded September 12 1962 John Fitzgerald Kennedy May 29 1917 November 22 1963 often referred to as JFK was an American politician who served as the 35th president of the United States from 1961 until his assassination in 1963. He was the youngest person elected president. a Kennedy served at the height of the Cold War and the majority of his foreign policy concerned relations with the Soviet Union and Cuba . A Democrat Kennedy represented Massachusetts in both houses of the United States Congress prior to his presidency. Born into the prominent Kennedy family in Brookline Massachusetts Kennedy graduated from Harvard University in 1940 joining the U.S. Naval Reserve the following year. During World War II he commanded PT boats in the Pacific theater . Kennedys survival following the sinking of PT-109 and his rescue of his fellow sailors made him a war hero and earned the Navy and Marine Corps Medal but left him with serious injuries. After a brief stint in journalism Kennedy represented a working-class Boston district in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1947 to 1953. He was subsequently elected to the U.S. Senate serving as the junior senator for Massachusetts from 1953 to 1960. While in the Senate Kennedy published his book Profiles in Courage which won a Pulitzer Prize . Kennedy ran in the 1960 presidential election . His campaign gained momentum after the first televised presidential debates in American history and he was elected president narrowly defeating Republican opponent Richard Nixon the incumbent vice president. Kennedys presidency saw high tensions with communist states in the Cold War. He increased the number of American military advisers in South Vietnam and the Strategic Hamlet Program began during his presidency. In 1961 he authorized attempts to overthrow the Cuban government of Fidel Castro in the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion and Operation Mongoose . In October 1962 U.S. spy planes discovered Soviet missile bases had been deployed in Cuba. The resulting period of tensions termed the Cuban Missile Crisis nearly resulted in nuclear war . In August 1961 after East German troops erected the Berlin Wall Kennedy sent an army convoy to reassure West Berliners of U.S. support and delivered one of his most famous speeches in West Berlin in June 1963. In 1963 Kennedy signed the first nuclear weapons treaty . He presided over the establishment of the Peace Corps Alliance for Progress with Latin America and the continuation of the Apollo program with the goal of landing a man on the Moon before 1970. He supported the civil rights movement but was only somewhat successful in passing his New Frontier domestic policies. On November 22 1963 Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas . His vice president Lyndon B. Johnson assumed the presidency . Lee Harvey Oswald was arrested for the assassination but he was shot and killed by Jack Ruby two days later. The FBI and the Warren Commission both concluded Oswald had acted alone but conspiracy theories about the assassination persist. After Kennedys death Congress enacted many of his proposals including the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Revenue Act of 1964 . Kennedy ranks highly in polls of U.S. presidents with historians and the general public. His personal life has been the focus of considerable sustained interest following public revelations in the 1970s of his chronic health ailments and extramarital affairs . Kennedy is the most recent U.S. president to have died in office . Early life and education Kennedys birthplace in Brookline Massachusetts John Fitzgerald Kennedy was born outside Boston in Brookline Massachusetts on May 29 1917 3 to Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. a businessman and politician and Rose Kennedy nee Fitzgerald a philanthropist and socialite. 4 His paternal grandfather P. J. Kennedy was an East Boston ward boss and Massachusetts state legislator . 5 Kennedys maternal grandfather and namesake John F. Fitzgerald was a U.S. congressman and two-term mayor of Boston . 6 All four of his grandparents were children of Irish immigrants. 1 Kennedy had an older brother Joseph Jr. and seven younger siblings: Rosemary Kathleen Eunice Patricia Robert Jean and Edward . 7 Kennedys father amassed a private fortune and established trust funds for his nine children that guaranteed lifelong financial independence. 8 His business kept him away from home for long stretches but Joe Sr. was a formidable presence in his childrens lives. He encouraged them to be ambitious emphasized political discussions at the dinner table and demanded a high level of academic achievement. Johns first exposure to politics was touring the Boston wards with his grandfather Fitzgerald during his 1922 failed gubernatorial campaign. 9 10 With Joe Sr.s business ventures concentrated on Wall Street and Hollywood and an outbreak of polio in Massachusetts the family decided to move from Boston to the Riverdale neighborhood of New York City in September 1927. 11 12 Several years later his brother Robert told Look magazine that his father left Boston because of job signs that read: No Irish Need Apply . 13 The Kennedys spent summers and early autumns at their home in Hyannis Port Massachusetts a village on Cape Cod 14 where they swam sailed and played touch football. 15 Christmas and Easter holidays were spent at their winter retreat in Palm Beach Florida . 16 In September 1930 Kennedy 13 years old was sent to the Canterbury School in New Milford Connecticut for 8th grade. In April 1931 he had an appendectomy after which he withdrew from Canterbury and recuperated at home. 17 In September 1931 Kennedy started attending Choate a preparatory boarding school in Wallingford Connecticut . 18 Rose had wanted John and Joe Jr. to attend a Catholic school but Joe Sr. thought that if they were to compete in the political world they needed to be with boys from prominent Protestant families. 19 John spent his first years at Choate in his older brothers shadow and compensated with rebellious behavior that attracted a clique. Their most notorious stunt was exploding a toilet seat with a firecracker. In the next chapel assembly the headmaster George St. John brandished the toilet seat and spoke of muckers who would spit in our sea leading Kennedy to name his group The Muckers Club which included roommate and lifelong friend Lem Billings . 20 21 Kennedy graduated from Choate in June 1935 finishing 64th of 112 students. 12 He had been the business manager of the school yearbook and was voted the most likely to succeed. 20 The Kennedy family in Hyannis Port Massachusetts with JFK at top left in the white shirt c. 1931 Kennedy intended to study under Harold Laski at the London School of Economics as his older brother had done. Ill health forced his return to the U.S. in October 1935 when he enrolled late at Princeton University but had to leave after two months due to gastrointestinal illness. 22 In September 1936 Kennedy enrolled at Harvard College . 23 He wrote occasionally for The Harvard Crimson the campus newspaper but had little involvement with campus politics preferring to concentrate on athletics and his social life. Kennedy played football and was on the JV squad during his sophomore year but an injury forced him off the team and left him with back problems that plagued him for the rest of his life. He won membership in the Hasty Pudding Club and the Spee Club one of Harvards elite final clubs . 24 25 In July 1938 Kennedy sailed overseas with his older brother to work at the American embassy in London where his father was serving as President Franklin D. Roosevelt s ambassador to the Court of St. Jamess . 26 The following year Kennedy traveled throughout Europe the Soviet Union the Balkans and the Middle East in preparation for his Harvard senior honors thesis. 27 He then went to Berlin where a U.S. diplomatic representative gave him a secret message about war breaking out soon to pass on to his father and to Czechoslovakia before returning to London on September 1 1939 the day that Germany invaded Poland ; the start of World War II . 28 Two days later the family was in the House of Commons for speeches endorsing the United Kingdoms declaration of war on Germany. Kennedy was sent as his fathers representative to help with arrangements for American survivors of the torpedoing of SS Athenia before flying back to the U.S. on his first transatlantic flight. 29 30 While Kennedy was an upperclassman at Harvard he began to take his studies more seriously and developed an interest in political philosophy . He made the deans list in his junior year. 31 In 1940 Kennedy completed his thesis Appeasement in Munich about British negotiations during the Munich Agreement . The thesis was released on July 24 under the title Why England Slept . 32 The book was one of the first to offer information about the war and its origins and quickly became a bestseller. 33 In addition to addressing Britains unwillingness to strengthen its military in the lead-up to the war the book called for an Anglo-American alliance against the rising totalitarian powers. Kennedy became increasingly supportive of U.S. intervention in World War II and his fathers isolationist beliefs resulted in the latters dismissal as ambassador. 34 In 1940 Kennedy graduated cum laude from Harvard with a Bachelor of Arts in government concentrating on international affairs . 35 That fall he enrolled at the Stanford Graduate School of Business and audited classes 36 but he left after a semester to help his father complete his memoirs as an American ambassador. In early 1941 Kennedy toured South America. 37 38 U.S. Naval Reserve 19411945 Kennedy planned to attend Yale Law School but canceled when American entry into World War II seemed imminent. 39 In 1940 Kennedy attempted to enter the armys Officer Candidate School . Despite months of training he was medically disqualified due to his chronic back problems. On September 24 1941 Kennedy with the help of the director of the Office of Naval Intelligence ONI and the former naval attache to Joe Sr. Alan Kirk joined the United States Naval Reserve . He was commissioned an ensign on October 26 1941 40 and joined the ONI staff in Washington D.C. 41 42 43 Lieutenant junior grade Kennedy standing at right with his PT-109 crew 1943 In January 1942 Kennedy was assigned to the ONI field office at Headquarters Sixth Naval District in Charleston South Carolina . 42 His hope was to be the commander of a PT patrol torpedo boat but his health problems seemed almost certain to prevent active duty. Kennedys father intervened by providing misleading medical records and convincing PT officers that his presence would bring publicity to the fleet. 44 Kennedy completed six months of training at the Naval Reserve Officer Training School in Chicago and at the Motor Torpedo Boat Squadrons Training Center in Melville Rhode Island . 41 45 His first command was PT-101 from December 7 1942 until February 23 1943. 42 Unhappy to be assigned to the Panama Canal far from the fighting Kennedy appealed to Massachusetts senator David Walsh who arranged for him to be assigned to the South Pacific . 44 Commanding PT-109 and PT-59 Main article: Patrol torpedo boat PT-109 Kennedy on his navy patrol boat the PT-109 1943 In April 1943 Kennedy was assigned to Motor Torpedo Squadron TWO 41 and on April 24 he took command of PT-109 46 then based on Tulagi Island in the Solomons . 42 On the night of August 12 in support of the New Georgia campaign PT-109 and fourteen other PTs were ordered to block or repel four Japanese destroyers and floatplanes carrying food supplies and 900 Japanese soldiers to the Vila Plantation garrison on the southern tip of the Solomons Kolombangara Island. Intelligence had been sent to Kennedys Commander Thomas G. Warfield expecting the arrival of the large Japanese naval force that would pass on the evening of August 1. Of the 24 torpedoes fired that night by eight of the American PTs not one hit the Japanese convoy. 47 On that moonless night Kennedy spotted a Japanese destroyer heading north on its return from the base of Kolombangara around 2:00 a.m. and attempted to turn to attack when PT-109 was rammed suddenly at an angle and cut in half by the destroyer Amagiri killing two PT-109 crew members. 48 49 42 b Avoiding surrender the remaining crew swam towards Plum Pudding Island 3.5 miles 5.6 km southwest of the remains of PT-109 on August 2. 42 51 Despite re-injuring his back in the collision Kennedy towed a badly burned crewman to the island with a life jacket strap clenched between his teeth. 52 From there Kennedy and his subordinate Ensign George Ross made forays through the coral islands searching for help. 53 When they encountered an English-speaking native with a canoe Kennedy carved his location on a coconut shell and requested a boat rescue. Seven days after the collision with the coconut message delivered the PT-109 crew were rescued. 54 55 Almost immediately the PT-109 rescue became a highly publicized event. The story was chronicled by John Hersey in The New Yorker in 1944 decades later it was the basis of a successful film . 55 It followed Kennedy into politics and provided a strong foundation for his appeal as a leader. 56 Hersey portrayed Kennedy as a modest self-deprecating hero. 57 For his courage and leadership Kennedy was awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Medal and the injuries he suffered during the incident qualified him for a Purple Heart . 56 After a months recovery Kennedy returned to duty commanding the PT-59 . On November 2 Kennedys PT-59 took part with two other PTs in the rescue of 4050 marines. The 59 acted as a shield from shore fire as they escaped on two rescue landing craft at the base of the Warrior River at Choiseul Island taking ten marines aboard and delivering them to safety. 58 Under doctors orders Kennedy was relieved of his command on November 18 and sent to the hospital on Tulagi. 59 By December 1943 with his health deteriorating Kennedy left the Pacific front and arrived in San Francisco in early January 1944. 60 After receiving treatment for his back injury at the Chelsea Naval Hospital in Massachusetts from May to December 1944 he was released from active duty. 61 41 Beginning in January 1945 Kennedy spent three months recovering from his back injury at Castle Hot Springs a resort and temporary military hospital in Arizona. 62 63 On March 1 1945 Kennedy retired from the Navy Reserve on physical disability and was honorably discharged with the full rank of lieutenant. 64 When later asked how he became a war hero Kennedy joked: It was easy. They cut my PT boat in half. 65 On August 12 1944 Kennedys older brother Joe Jr. a navy pilot was killed on an air mission. His body was never recovered. 66 67 The news reached the familys home in Hyannis Port Massachusetts a day later. Kennedy felt that Joe Jr.s reckless flight was partly an effort to outdo him. 68 69 To console himself Kennedy set out to assemble a privately published book of remembrances of his brother As We Remember Joe . 70 Journalism 1945 In April 1945 Kennedys father who was a friend of William Randolph Hearst arranged a position for his son as a special correspondent for Hearst Newspapers ; the assignment kept Kennedys name in the public eye and exposed him to journalism as a possible career. 71 That May he went to Berlin as a correspondent 72 covering the Potsdam Conference and other events. 73 U.S. House of Representatives 19471953 Kennedys elder brother Joe Jr. had been the familys political standard-bearer and had been tapped by their father to seek the presidency. After Joes death the assignment fell to JFK as the second eldest. 74 Boston mayor Maurice J. Tobin discussed the possibility of John becoming his running mate in 1946 as a candidate for Massachusetts lieutenant governor but Joe Sr. preferred a congressional campaign that could send John to Washington where he could have national visibility. 75 Kennedy back row second from right and Richard Nixon far right participate in a radio broadcast as 1947 freshmen House members. At the urging of Kennedys father U.S. Representative James Michael Curley vacated his seat in the strongly Democratic 11th congressional district of Massachusetts to become mayor of Boston in 1946. Kennedy established legal residency at 122 Bowdoin Street across from the Massachusetts State House . 76 Kennedy won the Democratic primary with 42 percent of the vote defeating nine other candidates. 77 According to Fredrik Logevall Joe Sr. spent hours on the phone with reporters and editors seeking information trading confidences and cajoling them into publishing puff pieces on John ones that invariably played up his war record in the Pacific. He oversaw a professional advertising campaign that ensured ads went up in just the right places the campaign had a virtual monopoly on Boston subway space and on window stickers Kennedy for Congress for cars and homes and was the force behind the mass mailing of Herseys PT-109 article. 78 Though Republicans took control of the House in the 1946 elections Kennedy defeated his Republican opponent in the general election taking 73 percent of the vote. 79 As a congressman Kennedy had a reputation for not taking much interest in the running of his office or his constituents concerns with one of the highest absenteeism rates in the House although much was explained by illness. 80 George Smathers one of his few political friends at the time claimed that he was more interested in being a writer than a politician and at that time he suffered from extreme shyness. 80 Kennedy found most of his fellow congressmen boring preoccupied as they all seemed to be with their narrow political concerns. The arcane House rules and customs which slowed legislation exasperated him. 81 Kennedy served in the House for six years joining the influential Education and Labor Committee and the Veterans Affairs Committee . He concentrated his attention on international affairs supporting the Truman Doctrine as the appropriate response to the emerging Cold War . He also supported public housing and opposed the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947 which restricted the power of labor unions. Though not as vocally anti-communist as Joseph McCarthy Kennedy supported the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 which required communists to register with the government and he deplored the loss of China . 82 During a speech in Salem Massachusetts on January 30 1949 Kennedy denounced Truman and the State Department for contributing to the tragic story of China whose freedom we once fought to preserve. What our young men had saved in World War II our diplomats and our President have frittered away. 83 84 Having served as a boy scout during his childhood Kennedy was active in the Boston Council from 1946 to 1955 as district vice chairman member of the executive board vice-president and National Council Representative. 85 86 To appeal to the large Italian-American voting bloc in Massachusetts Kennedy delivered a speech in November 1947 supporting a 227 million aid package to Italy. He maintained that Italy was in danger from an onslaught of the communist minority and that the country was the initial battleground in the communist drive to capture Western Europe. 87 To combat Soviet efforts to take control in Middle Eastern and Asian countries like Indochina Kennedy wanted the United States to develop nonmilitary techniques of resistance that would not create suspicions of neoimperialism or add to the countrys financial burden. The problem as he saw it was not simply to be anti-communist but to stand for something that these emerging nations would find appealing. 88 Almost every weekend that Congress was in session Kennedy would fly back to Massachusetts to give speeches to veteran fraternal and civic groups while maintaining an index card file on individuals who might be helpful for a campaign for statewide office. 89 Contemplating whether to run for Massachusetts governor or the U.S. Senate Kennedy abandoned interest in the former believing that the governor sat in an office handing out sewer contracts. 90 U.S. Senate 19531960 See also: 1952 United States Senate election in Massachusetts and 1958 United States Senate election in Massachusetts Campaign slogan for Kennedys 1952 U.S. Senate campaign in Massachusetts As early as 1949 Kennedy began preparing to run for the Senate in 1952 against Republican three-term incumbent Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. with the campaign slogan KENNEDY WILL DO MORE FOR MASSACHUSETTS . 91 Joe Sr. again financed his sons candidacy persuading the Boston Post to switch its support to Kennedy by promising the publisher a 500 000 loan 92 while Johns younger brother Robert emerged as campaign manager. 93 Kennedys mother and sisters contributed as highly effective canvassers by hosting a series of teas at hotels and parlors across Massachusetts to reach out to women voters. 94 95 In the presidential election Republican Dwight D. Eisenhower carried Massachusetts by 208 000 votes but Kennedy narrowly defeated Lodge by 70 000 votes for the Senate seat. 96 The following year he married Jacqueline Bouvier . 97 Kennedy underwent several spinal operations over the next two years. Often absent from the Senate he was at times critically ill and received Catholic last rites . During his convalescence in 1956 he published Profiles in Courage a book about U.S. senators who risked their careers for their personal beliefs for which he won the Pulitzer Prize for Biography in 1957. 98 Rumors that this work was ghostwritten by his close adviser and speechwriter Ted Sorensen were confirmed in Sorensens 2008 autobiography. 99 At the start of his first term Kennedy focused on fulfilling the promise of his campaign to do more for Massachusetts than his predecessor. Although Kennedys and Lodges legislative records were similarly liberal Lodge voted for the Taft-Hartley Act of 1947 and Kennedy voted against it. On NBC s Meet the Press Kennedy excoriated Lodge for not doing enough to prevent the increasing migration of manufacturing jobs from Massachusetts to the South and blamed the right-to-work provision for giving the South an unfair advantage over Massachusetts in labor costs. 100 In May 1953 Kennedy introduced The Economic Problems of New England 101 a 36-point program 102 to help Massachusetts industries such as fishing textile manufacturing watchmaking and shipbuilding as well as the Boston seaport. 103 Kennedys policy agenda included protective tariffs preventing excessive speculation in raw wool stronger efforts to research and market American fish products an increase in the Fish and Wildlife Service budget modernizing reserve-fleet vessels tax incentives to prevent further business relocations and the development of hydroelectric and nuclear power in Massachusetts. 104 105 106 Kennedys suggestions for stimulating the regions economy appealed to both parties by offering benefits to business and labor and promising to serve national defense. Congress would eventually enact most of the program. 103 Kennedy a Massachusetts Audubon Society supporter wanted to make sure that the shorelines of Cape Cod remained unsullied by industrialization. On September 3 1959 Kennedy co-sponsored the Cape Cod National Seashore bill with his Republican colleague Senator Leverett Saltonstall . 107 108 Kennedy endorsing Adlai Stevenson II for the presidential nomination at the 1956 Democratic National Convention As a senator Kennedy quickly won a reputation for responsiveness to requests from constituents i.e. co-sponsoring legislation to provide federal loans to help rebuild communities damaged by the 1953 Worcester tornado except on certain occasions when the national interest was at stake. 109 110 In 1954 Kennedy voted in favor of the Saint Lawrence Seaway which would connect the Great Lakes to the Atlantic Ocean despite opposition from Massachusetts politicians who argued that the project would hurt the Port of Boston economically. 111 In 1954 when the Senate voted to condemn Joseph McCarthy for breaking Senate rules and abusing an Army general Kennedy was the only Democrat not to cast a vote against him. 112 Kennedy drafted a speech supporting the censure. However it was not delivered because Kennedy was hospitalized for back surgery in Boston. 113 Although Kennedy never indicated how he would have voted the episode damaged his support among members of the liberal community in the 1956 and 1960 elections. 114 In 1956 Kennedy gained control of the Massachusetts Democratic Party 115 and delivered the state delegation to the partys presidential nominee Adlai Stevenson II at the Democratic National Convention in August. 116 Stevenson let the convention select the vice presidential nominee . Kennedy finished second in the balloting losing to Senator Estes Kefauver of Tennessee but receiving national exposure. 117 In 1957 Kennedy joined the Senates Select Committee on Labor Rackets also known as the McClellan Committee with his brother Robert who was chief counsel to investigate racketeering in labor-management relations. 118 The hearings attracted extensive radio and television coverage where the Kennedy brothers engaged in dramatic arguments with controversial labor leaders including Jimmy Hoffa of the Teamsters Union . The following year Kennedy introduced a bill to prevent the expenditure of union dues for improper purposes or private gain; to forbid loans from union funds for illicit transactions; and to compel audits of unions which would ensure against false financial reports. 119 It was the first major labor relations bill to pass either house since the TaftHartley Act of 1947 and dealt largely with the control of union abuses exposed by the McClellan Committee but did not incorporate tough TaftHartley amendments requested by President Eisenhower. It survived Senate floor attempts to include Taft-Hartley amendments and passed but was rejected by the House. 120 Honest union members and the general public can only regard it as a tragedy that politics has prevented the recommendations of the McClellan committee from being carried out this year Kennedy announced. 121 That same year Kennedy joined the Senates Foreign Relations Committee . 122 There he supported Algerias effort to gain independence from France and sponsored an amendment to the Mutual Defense Assistance Act that would provide aid to Soviet satellite nations. Kennedy also introduced an amendment to the National Defense Education Act in 1959 to eliminate the requirement that aid recipients sign a loyalty oath and provide supporting affidavits. 123 Kennedy cast a procedural vote against President Eisenhowers bill for the Civil Rights Act of 1957 and this was considered by some to be an appeasement of Southern Democratic opponents of the bill. 124 Kennedy did vote for Title III of the act which would have given the Attorney General powers to enjoin but Majority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson agreed to let the provision die as a compromise measure. 125 Kennedy also voted for the Jury Trial Amendment. Many civil rights advocates criticized that vote as one which would weaken the act. 126 A final compromise bill which Kennedy supported was passed in September 1957. 127 As a senator from Massachusetts which lacked a sizable Black population Kennedy was not particularly sensitive to the problems of African Americans. Robert Kennedy later reflected We werent thinking of the Negroes of Mississippi or Alabamawhat should be done for them. We were thinking of what needed to be done in Massachusetts. 128 Results of the 1958 U.S. Senate election in Massachusetts by municipality . Kennedys margin of victory of 874 608 votes was the largest in Massachusetts political history. 129 130 Most historians and political scientists who have written about Kennedy refer to his U.S. Senate years as an interlude. 131 According to Robert Dallek Kennedy called being a senator the most corrupting job in the world. He complained that they were all too quick to cut deals and please campaign contributors to ensure their political futures. Kennedy with the luxury of a rich father who could finance his campaigns could remain independent of any special interest except for those in his home state of Massachusetts that could align against his reelection. 132 According to Robert Caro Majority Leader Lyndon Johnson viewed Kennedy as a playboy describing his performance in the Senate and the House as pathetic on another occasion saying that he was smart enough but he doesnt like the grunt work . 133 Author John T. Shaw acknowledges that while his Senate career is not associated with acts of historic statesmanship or novel political thought Kennedy made modest contributions as a legislator drafting more than 300 bills to assist Massachusetts and the New England region some of which became law. 134 In 1958 Kennedy was re-elected to the Senate defeating his Republican opponent Boston lawyer Vincent J. Celeste with 73.6 percent of the vote the largest winning margin in the history of Massachusetts politics. 96 In the aftermath of his re-election Kennedy began preparing to run for president by traveling throughout the U.S. with the aim of building his candidacy for 1960. 135 118 1960 presidential election Main article: John F. Kennedy 1960 presidential campaign See also: 1960 Democratic Party presidential primaries and 1960 United States presidential election 1960 presidential campaign poster On January 2 1960 Kennedy announced his candidacy for the Democratic presidential nomination . 136 Though some questioned Kennedys age and experience his charisma and eloquence earned him numerous supporters. Kennedy faced several potential challengers including Senate Majority Leader Lyndon Johnson Adlai Stevenson II and Senator Hubert Humphrey . 137 Kennedy traveled extensively to build his support. His campaign strategy was to win several primaries to demonstrate his electability to the party bosses who controlled most of the delegates and to prove to his detractors that a Catholic could win popular support. 138 Victories over Senator Humphrey in the Wisconsin and West Virginia primaries gave Kennedy momentum as he moved on to the 1960 Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles. 137 139 When Kennedy entered the convention he had the most delegates but not enough to ensure that he would win the nomination. 140 Stevensonthe 1952 and 1956 presidential nomineeremained very popular while Johnson also hoped to win the nomination with support from party leaders. Kennedys candidacy also faced opposition from former President Harry S. Truman who was concerned about Kennedys lack of experience. Kennedy knew that a second ballot could give the nomination to Johnson or someone else and his well-organized campaign was able to earn the support of just enough delegates to win the presidential nomination on the first ballot. 141 Kennedy ignored the opposition of his brother Robert who wanted him to choose labor leader Walter Reuther 142 and other liberal supporters when he chose Johnson as his vice-presidential nominee. He believed that the Texas senator could help him win support from the South . 143 144 In accepting the presidential nomination Kennedy gave his well-known New Frontier speech: For the problems are not all solved and the battles are not all wonand we stand today on the edge of a New Frontier. ... But the New Frontier of which I speak is not a set of promisesit is a set of challenges. It sums up not what I intend to offer the American people but what I intend to ask of them. 145 At the start of the fall general election campaign the Republican nominee and incumbent Vice President Richard Nixon held a six-point lead in the polls. 146 Major issues included how to get the economy moving again Kennedys Catholicism the Cuban Revolution and whether the space and missile programs of the Soviet Union had surpassed those of the U.S. To address fears that his being Catholic would impact his decision-making he told the Greater Houston Ministerial Association on September 12: I am not the Catholic candidate for president. I am the Democratic Party candidate for president who also happens to be a Catholic. I do not speak for my Church on public mattersand the Church does not speak for me. 147 He promised to respect the separation of church and state and not to allow Catholic officials to dictate public policy. 148 149 Kennedy and Richard Nixon participate in the nations second televised presidential debate c. October 7 1960 . The Kennedy and Nixon campaigns agreed to a series of televised debates . 150 An estimated 70 million Americans about two-thirds of the electorate watched the first debate on September 26. 151 Kennedy had met the day before with the producer to discuss the set design and camera placement. Nixon just out of the hospital after a painful knee injury did not take advantage of this opportunity and during the debate looked at the reporters asking questions and not at the camera. Kennedy wore a blue suit and shirt to cut down on glare and appeared sharply focused against the gray studio background. Nixon wore a light-colored suit that blended into the gray background; in combination with the harsh studio lighting that left Nixon perspiring he offered a less-than-commanding presence. By contrast Kennedy appeared relaxed tanned and telegenic looking into the camera whilst answering questions. 152 150 It is often claimed that television viewers overwhelmingly believed Kennedy appearing to be the more attractive of the two had won while radio listeners a smaller audience thought Nixon had defeated him. 151 153 154 However only one poll split TV and radio voters like this and the methodology was poor. 155 Pollster Elmo Roper concluded that the debates raised interest boosted turnout and gave Kennedy an extra two million votes mostly as a result of the first debate. 156 The debates are now considered a milestone in American political historythe point at which the medium of television began to play a dominant role. 98 1960 presidential election results Kennedys campaign gained momentum after the first debate and he pulled slightly ahead of Nixon in most polls. On Election Day Kennedy defeated Nixon in one of the closest presidential elections of the 20th century. In the national popular vote by most accounts Kennedy led Nixon by just two-tenths of one percent 49.7 to 49.5 while in the Electoral College he won 303 votes to Nixons 219 269 were needed to win. 157 Fourteen electors from Mississippi and Alabama refused to support Kennedy because of his support for the civil rights movement ; they voted for Senator Harry F. Byrd of Virginia as did an elector from Oklahoma. 157 Forty-three years old Kennedy was the youngest person ever elected to the presidency though Theodore Roosevelt was a year younger when he succeeded to the presidency after the assassination of William McKinley in 1901. 158 Presidency 19611963 Main article: Presidency of John F. Kennedy For a chronological guide see Timeline of the John F. Kennedy presidency . Chief Justice Earl Warren administers the presidential oath of office to Kennedy at the Capitol January 20 1961. Kennedy was sworn in as the 35th president at noon on January 20 1961. In his inaugural address he spoke of the need for all Americans to be active citizens: Ask not what your country can do for youask what you can do for your country. He asked the nations of the world to join to fight what he called the common enemies of man: tyranny poverty disease and war itself. 159 He added: All this will not be finished in the first one hundred days. Nor will it be finished in the first one thousand days nor in the life of this Administration nor even perhaps in our lifetime on this planet. But let us begin. In closing he expanded on his desire for greater internationalism: Finally whether you are citizens of America or citizens of the world ask of us here the same high standards of strength and sacrifice which we ask of you. 159 The address reflected Kennedys confidence that his administration would chart a historically significant course in both domestic policy and foreign affairs. The contrast between this optimistic vision and the pressures of managing daily political realities would be one of the main tensions of the early years of his administration. 160 Kennedy scrapped the decision-making structure of Eisenhower 161 preferring an organizational structure of a wheel with all the spokes leading to the president; he was willing to make the increased number of quick decisions required in such an environment. 162 Though the cabinet remained important Kennedy generally relied more on his staffers within the Executive Office . 163 In spite of concerns over nepotism Kennedys father insisted that Robert Kennedy become U.S. Attorney General and the younger Kennedy became the assistant president who advised on all major issues. 164 Foreign policy Main article: Foreign policy of the John F. Kennedy administration Foreign trips of Kennedy during his presidency Cold War and flexible response Kennedys foreign policy was dominated by American confrontations with the Soviet Union manifested by proxy contests in the global state of tension known as the Cold War . Like his predecessors Kennedy adopted the policy of containment to stop the spread of communism. 165 Fearful of the possibility of nuclear war Kennedy implemented a defense strategy known as flexible response . This strategy relied on multiple options for responding to the Soviet Union discouraged massive retaliation and encouraged mutual deterrence . 166 167 In contrast to Eisenhowers warning about the perils of the military-industrial complex Kennedy focused on rearmament. From 1961 to 1964 the number of nuclear weapons increased by 50 percent as did the number of B-52 bombers to deliver them. 168 In January 1961 Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev declared his support for wars of national liberation . Kennedy interpreted this step as a direct threat to the free world. 169 170 Decolonization and the Congo Crisis President Kennedy with Congolese Prime Minister Cyrille Adoula in 1962 Between 1960 and 1963 twenty-four countries gained independence as the process of decolonization continued. Kennedy set out to woo the leaders and people of the Third World expanding economic aid and appointing knowledgeable ambassadors. 171 His administration established the Food for Peace program and the Peace Corps to provide aid to developing countries . The Food for Peace program became a central element in American foreign policy and eventually helped many countries to develop their economies and become commercial import customers. 172 During the election campaign Kennedy attacked the Eisenhower administration for losing ground on the African continent 173 and stressed that the U.S. should be on the side of anti-colonialism and self-determination. 174 Kennedy considered the Congo Crisis to be among the most important foreign policy issues facing his presidency and he supported a UN operation that prevented the secession of Katanga . 175 Moise Tshombe leader of Katanga declared its independence from the Congo and the Soviet Union responded by sending weapons and technicians to underwrite their struggle. 174 On October 2 1962 Kennedy signed United Nations bond issue bill to ensure U.S. assistance in financing UN peacekeeping operations in the Congo and elsewhere. 176 Peace Corps Main article: Peace Corps Kennedy greets Peace Corps volunteers on August 28 1961 In one of his first presidential acts Kennedy signed Executive Order 10924 that officially started the Peace Corps . He named his brother-in-law Sargent Shriver as its first director. 177 Through this program Americans volunteered to help developing countries in fields like education farming health care and construction. 178 Kennedy believed that countries that received Peace Corps volunteers were less likely to succumb to a communist revolution. 179 Tanganyika present-day Tanzania and Ghana were the first countries to participate. 180 The organization grew to 5 000 members by March 1963 and 10 000 the year after. 181 Since 1961 over 200 000 Americans have joined the Peace Corps representing 139 countries. 182 183 Vienna Summit and the Berlin Wall See also: Vienna summit and Berlin Crisis of 1961 Kennedy anxiously anticipated a summit with Nikita Khrushchev. The proceedings for the summit got off to a problematic start when Kennedy reacted aggressively to a routine Khrushchev speech on Cold War confrontation in early 1961. The speech was intended for domestic audiences in the Soviet Union but Kennedy interpreted it as a personal challenge. His mistake helped raise tensions going into the Vienna summit . 184 The summit would cover several topics but both leaders knew that the most contentious issue would be Berlin which had been divided in two with the start of the Cold War. The enclave of West Berlin lay within Soviet-allied East Germany but was supported by the U.S. and other Western powers. The Soviets wanted to reunify Berlin under the control of East Germany partly due to the large number of East Germans who had fled to West Berlin. 185 Kennedy meeting with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev in Vienna in June 1961 On June 4 1961 Kennedy met with Khrushchev in Vienna and left the meeting angry and disappointed that he had allowed the premier to bully him despite the warnings he had received. Khrushchev for his part was impressed with the presidents intelligence but thought him weak. Kennedy did succeed in conveying the bottom line to Khrushchev on the most sensitive issue before them a proposed treaty between Moscow and East Berlin . He made it clear that any treaty interfering with U.S. access rights in West Berlin would be regarded as an act of war. 186 Shortly after Kennedy returned home the Soviet Union announced its plan to sign a treaty with East Berlin abrogating any third-party occupation rights in either sector of the city. Kennedy assumed that his only option was to prepare the country for nuclear war which he thought had a one-in-five chance of occurring. 187 In the weeks immediately following the summit more than 20 000 people fled from East Berlin to the western sector reacting to statements from the Soviet Union. Kennedy began intensive meetings on the Berlin issue where Dean Acheson took the lead in recommending a military buildup alongside NATO allies. 188 In a July 1961 speech Kennedy announced his decision to add 3.25 billion equivalent to 33.14 billion in 2023 to the defense budget along with over 200 000 additional troops stating that an attack on West Berlin would be taken as an attack on the U.S. The speech received an 85 approval rating. 189 A month later both the Soviet Union and East Berlin began blocking any further passage of East Germans into West Berlin and erected barbed-wire fences which were quickly upgraded to the Berlin Wall . Kennedy acquiesced to the wall though he sent Vice President Johnson to West Berlin to reaffirm U.S. commitment to the enclaves defense. In the following months in a sign of rising Cold War tensions both the U.S. and the Soviet Union ended a moratorium on nuclear weapon testing. 190 A brief stand-off between U.S. and Soviet tanks occurred at Checkpoint Charlie in October following a dispute over free movement of Allied personnel. The crisis was defused largely through a backchannel communication the Kennedy administration had set up with Soviet spy Georgi Bolshakov . 191 In remarks to his aides on the Berlin Wall Kennedy noted that its not a very nice solution but a wall is a hell of a lot better than a war. 192 Bay of Pigs Invasion Main article: Bay of Pigs Invasion See also: Kennedys betrayal President Kennedy and Jacqueline Kennedy greet members of the 2506 Cuban Invasion Brigade at Miamis Orange Bowl ; c. December 29 1962 . The Eisenhower administration had created a plan to overthrow Fidel Castro s regime though an invasion of Cuba by a counter-revolutionary insurgency composed of U.S.-trained anti-Castro Cuban exiles 193 194 led by CIA paramilitary officers. 195 Kennedy had campaigned on a hardline stance against Castro and when presented with the plan that had been developed under the Eisenhower administration he enthusiastically adopted it regardless of the risk of inflaming tensions with the Soviet Union. 196 Kennedy approved the final invasion plan on April 4 1961. 197 On April 15 1961 eight CIA-supplied B-26 bombers left Nicaragua to bomb Cuban airfields. The bombers missed many of their targets leaving most of Castros air force intact. 198 On April 17 the 1 500 U.S.-trained Cuban exile invasion force known as Brigade 2506 landed at beaches along the Bay of Pigs and immediately came under heavy fire. 199 The goal was to spark a widespread popular uprising against Castro but no such uprising occurred. 200 No U.S. air support was provided. 201 The invading force was defeated within two days by the Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces ; 202 114 were killed and Kennedy was forced to negotiate for the release of the 1 189 survivors. 203 After twenty months Cuba released the captured exiles in exchange for a ransom of 53 million worth of food and medicine. 204 The incident made Castro wary of the U.S. and led him to believe that another invasion would take place. 205 Biographer Richard Reeves said that Kennedy focused primarily on the political repercussions of the plan rather than military considerations. When it proved unsuccessful he was convinced that the plan was a setup to make him look bad. 206 He took responsibility for the failure saying We got a big kick in the leg and we deserved it. But maybe well learn something from it. 207 Kennedys approval ratings climbed afterwards helped in part by the vocal support given to him by Nixon and Eisenhower. 208 He appointed Robert Kennedy to help lead a committee to examine the causes of the failure. 209 The Kennedy administration banned all Cuban imports and convinced the Organization of American States OAS to expel Cuba. 210 Operation Mongoose In late 1961 the White House formed the Special Group Augmented headed by Robert Kennedy and including Edward Lansdale Secretary Robert McNamara and others. The groups objectiveto overthrow Castro via espionage sabotage and other covert tacticswas never pursued. 211 In November 1961 he authorized Operation Mongoose . 212 In March 1962 Kennedy rejected Operation Northwoods proposals for false flag attacks against American military and civilian targets 213 and blaming them on the Cuban government to gain approval for a war against Cuba. However the administration continued to plan for an invasion of Cuba in the summer of 1962. 212 Cuban Missile Crisis Main article: Cuban Missile Crisis Kennedy signs the Proclamation for Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba in the Oval Office; c. October 23 1962 . In the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs invasion Khrushchev increased economic and military assistance to Cuba. 214 The Soviet Union planned to allocate in Cuba 49 medium-range ballistic missiles 32 intermediate-range ballistic missiles 49 light Il-28 bombers and about 100 tactical nuclear weapons . 215 The Kennedy administration viewed the growing Cuba-Soviet alliance with alarm fearing that it could eventually pose a threat to the U.S. 216 On October 14 1962 CIA U-2 spy planes took photographs of the Soviets construction of intermediate-range ballistic missile sites in Cuba. The photos were shown to Kennedy on October 16; a consensus was reached that the missiles were offensive in nature and posed an immediate nuclear threat. 217 Kennedy faced a dilemma: if the U.S. attacked the sites it might lead to nuclear war with the Soviet Union but if the U.S. did nothing it would be faced with the increased threat from close-range nuclear weapons positioned approximately 90 mi 140 km away from the Florida coast. 218 The U.S. would also appear to the world as less committed to the defense of the Western Hemisphere. On a personal level Kennedy needed to show resolve in reaction to Khrushchev especially after the Vienna summit. 219 To deal with the crisis he formed an ad-hoc body of key advisers later known as EXCOMM that met secretly between October 16 and 28. 220 More than a third of U.S. National Security Council NSC members favored an unannounced air assault on the missile sites but some saw this as Pearl Harbor in reverse. 221 There was some concern from the international community asked in confidence that the assault plan was an overreaction given that Eisenhower had placed PGM-19 Jupiter missiles in Italy and Turkey in 1958. It also could not be assured that the assault would be 100 effective. 222 In concurrence with a majority vote of the NSC Kennedy decided on a naval blockade or quarantine . On October 22 after privately informing the cabinet and leading members of Congress about the situation Kennedy announced the naval blockade on national television and warned that U.S. forces would seize offensive weapons and associated materiel that Soviet vessels might attempt to deliver to Cuba. 223 Kennedy confers with Attorney General Robert Kennedy ; c. October 1962 . The U.S. Navy would stop and inspect all Soviet ships arriving off Cuba beginning October 24. Several Soviet ships approached the blockade line but they stopped or reversed course. 224 The OAS gave unanimous support to the removal of the missiles. Kennedy exchanged two sets of letters with Khrushchev to no avail. 225 UN Secretary General U Thant requested both parties to reverse their decisions and enter a cooling-off period. Khrushchev agreed but Kennedy did not. 226 Kennedy managed to preserve restraint when a Soviet missile unauthorizedly downed a U.S. Lockheed U-2 reconnaissance aircraft over Cuba killing pilot Rudolf Anderson . 227 At the presidents direction Robert Kennedy privately informed Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin that the U.S. would remove the Jupiter missiles from Turkey within a short time after this crisis was over. 228 On October 28 Khrushchev agreed to dismantle the missile sites subject to UN inspections. 229 The U.S. publicly promised never to invade Cuba and privately agreed to remove its Jupiter missiles from Italy and Turkey which were by then obsolete and had been supplanted by submarines equipped with UGM-27 Polaris missiles. 230 In the aftermath a MoscowWashington hotline was established to ensure clear communications between the leaders of the two countries. 231 This crisis brought the world closer to nuclear war than at any point before or after but the humanity of Khrushchev and Kennedy prevailed. 232 The crisis improved the image of American willpower and the presidents credibility. Kennedys approval rating increased from 66 to 77 immediately thereafter. 233 Latin America and communism Further information: Presidency of John F. Kennedy Latin America See also: Alliance for Progress Kennedy in December 1961 promoting the Alliance for Progress with Venezuelan President Romulo Betancourt Believing that those who make peaceful revolution impossible will make violent revolution inevitable 234 235 Kennedy sought to contain the perceived threat of communism in Latin America by establishing the Alliance for Progress which sent aid to some countries and sought greater human rights standards in the region. 236 In response to Kennedys plea Congress voted for an initial grant of 500 million in May 1961. 237 The Alliance for Progress supported the construction of housing schools airports hospitals clinics and water-purification projects as well as the distribution of free textbooks to students. 238 However the program did not meet many of its goals. Massive land reform was not achieved; populations more than kept pace with gains in health and welfare; and according to one study only 2 percent of economic growth in 1960s Latin America directly benefited the poor. 239 240 U.S. presidents after Kennedy were less supportive of the program and by 1973 the permanent committee established to implement the Alliance was disbanded by the OAS. 238 The Eisenhower administration through the CIA had begun formulating plans to assassinate Castro in Cuba and Rafael Trujillo in the Dominican Republic . When Kennedy took office he privately instructed the CIA that any plan must include plausible deniability by the U.S. His public position was in opposition. 241 In June 1961 the Dominican Republics leader was assassinated; in the days following Undersecretary of State Chester Bowles led a cautious reaction by the nation. Robert Kennedy who saw an opportunity for the U.S. called Bowles a gutless bastard to his face. 242 Laos See also: Laotian Civil War After the election Eisenhower emphasized to Kennedy that the communist threat in Southeast Asia required priority; Eisenhower considered Laos to be the cork in the bottle in regards to the regional threat. 243 In March 1961 Kennedy voiced a change in policy from supporting a free Laos to a neutral Laos indicating privately that Vietnam should be deemed Americas tripwire for communisms spread in the area. 243 Though he was unwilling to commit U.S. forces to a major military intervention in Laos Kennedy did approve CIA activities designed to defeat Communist insurgents through bombing raids and the recruitment of the Hmong people . 244 Vietnam Further information: Presidency of John F. Kennedy Vietnam See also: Vietnam War Kennedy speaking in a televised press conference on the situation in Southeast Asia c. March 23 1961 Walter Cronkite of CBS News interviewing Kennedy on September 2 1963 about U.S. involvement in Vietnam During his presidency Kennedy continued policies that provided political economic and military support to the South Vietnamese government. 245 Vietnam had been divided into a communist North Vietnam and a non-communist South Vietnam after the 1954 Geneva Conference but Kennedy escalated American involvement in Vietnam in 1961 by financing the South Vietnam army increasing the number of U.S. military advisors above the levels of the Eisenhower administration and authorizing U.S. helicopter units to provide support to South Vietnamese forces. 246 On January 18 1962 Kennedy formally authorized escalated involvement when he signed the National Security Action Memorandum NSAM Subversive Insurgency War of Liberation. 247 Operation Ranch Hand a large-scale aerial defoliation effort using the herbicide Agent Orange began on the roadsides of South Vietnam to combat guerrilla defendants . 248 249 Though Kennedy provided support for South Vietnam throughout his tenure Vietnam remained a secondary issue for the Kennedy administration until 1963. 250 On September 2 Kennedy declared in an interview with Walter Cronkite of CBS : In the final analysis it is their war. They are the ones who have to win it or lose it. We can help them we can give them equipment we can send our men out there as advisers but they have to win it the people of Vietnam against the Communists... But I dont agree with those who say we should withdraw. That would be a great mistake... The United States made this effort to defend Europe. Now Europe is quite secure. We also have to participatewe may not like itin the defense of Asia. 251 252 Kennedy increasingly soured on the president of South Vietnam Ngo Dinh Diem whose violent crackdown on Buddhist practices galvanized opposition to his leadership. In August 1963 Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. replaced Frederick Nolting as the U.S. ambassador to South Vietnam. Days after his arrival in South Vietnam Lodge reported that several South Vietnamese generals sought the assent of the U.S. government to their plan of removing Diem from power. The Kennedy administration was split regarding not just the removal of Diem but also their assessment of the military situation and the proper U.S. role in the country. After the State Department sent a diplomatic cable to Lodge that ordered him to pressure Diem to remove military authority from his brother Ngo inh Nhu or face potential withdrawal of U.S. support and removal from power 253 Kennedy instructed Lodge to offer covert assistance to a coup detat excluding assassination. 254 On November 1 1963 a junta of senior military officers executed the coup which led to the arrest and assassinations of Diem and Nhu on November 2. 255 By November 1963 there were 16 000 American military personnel in South Vietnam up from Eisenhowers 900 advisors; 256 more than one hundred Americans had been killed in action and no final policy decision was made. 257 258 259 In the aftermath of the aborted coup in September 1963 the Kennedy administration reevaluated its policies in South Vietnam. Kennedy rejected the full-scale deployment of ground soldiers but also the total withdrawal of U.S. forces. 260 Historians disagree on whether the U.S. military presence in Vietnam would have escalated had Kennedy survived and been re-elected in 1964. 261 Fueling the debate are statements made by Secretary of Defense McNamara in the 2003 documentary film The Fog of War that Kennedy was strongly considering pulling out of Vietnam after the 1964 election 262 and comments made by Kennedy administration White House Counsel and speechwriter Ted Sorensen in a 2008 memoir suggesting that Kennedy was undecided about what policy direction to take. 263 259 On October 11 1963 Kennedy signed NSAM 263 ordering the withdrawal of 1 000 military personnel by the end of the year following the third recommendation of the McNamaraTaylor mission report which concluded that the training program for the South Vietnamese military had sufficiently progressed to justify the withdrawal. 264 265 266 However NSAM 263 also approved the first recommendation of the report to continue providing support to South Vietnam to prevent the spread of communism and until the Viet Cong was suppressed while the third recommendation suggested that even if the majority of the U.S. military objective was completed by the end of 1965 that continued presence of U.S. training personnel in more limited numbers could be necessary if the insurgency was not suppressed. 267 268 266 West Berlin speech Kennedy delivering his speech in West Berlin In 1963 Germany was enduring a time of particular vulnerability due to Soviet aggression to the east as well as the impending retirement of West German Chancellor Adenauer . 269 At the same time French President Charles de Gaulle was trying to build a Franco-West German counterweight to the American and Soviet spheres of influence. 270 271 272 To Kennedys eyes this Franco-German cooperation seemed directed against NATO s influence in Europe. 273 To reinforce the U.S. alliance with West Germany Kennedy travelled to West Germany and West Berlin in June 1963. On June 26 Kennedy toured West Berlin culminating in a public speech at the city hall in front of hundreds of thousands of enthusiastic Berliners. 274 He reiterated the American commitment to Germany and criticized communism and was met with an ecstatic response from the massive audience. 275 Kennedy used the construction of the Berlin Wall as an example of the failures of communism: Freedom has many difficulties and democracy is not perfect. But we have never had to put a wall up to keep our people in to prevent them from leaving us. The speech is known for its famous phrase Ich bin ein Berliner I am a Berliner . 276 Middle East Further information: Presidency of John F. Kennedy Middle East Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi of Iran Kennedy and U.S. Defense Secretary Robert McNamara in the White House Cabinet Room on April 13 1962 Kennedy ended the arms embargo that the Truman and Eisenhower administrations had enforced on Israel in favor of increased security ties becoming the founder of the U.S.-Israeli military alliance . Describing the protection of Israel as a moral and national commitment he was the first to introduce the concept of a special relationship between the U.S. and Israel. 277 In 1962 the Kennedy administration sold Israel a major weapon system the Hawk antiaircraft missile . Historians differ as to whether Kennedy pursued security ties with Israel primarily to shore up support with Jewish-American voters or because of his admiration of the Jewish state. 278 In December 1961 Abd al-Karim Qasim s Iraqi government passed Public Law 80 which restricted the partially American-controlled Iraq Petroleum Company IPCs concessionary holding to those areas in which oil was actually being produced namely the fields at Az Zubair and Kirkuk effectively expropriating 99.5 of the IPC concession. British and U.S. officials demanded that the Kennedy administration place pressure on the Qasim regime. 279 In April 1962 the State Department issued new guidelines on Iraq that were intended to increase American influence. Meanwhile Kennedy instructed the CIAunder the direction of Archibald Bulloch Roosevelt Jr. to begin making preparations for a military coup against Qasim. 280 The anti-imperialist and anti-communist Iraqi Baath Party overthrew and executed Qasim in a violent coup on February 8 1963. Despite persistent rumors that the CIA orchestrated the coup declassified documents and the testimony of former CIA officers indicate that there was no direct American involvement. 281 The Kennedy administration was pleased with the outcome and ultimately approved a 55-million arms deal for Iraq. 282 Ireland Kennedys motorcade through Cork Ireland on June 28 1963 During his four-day visit to his ancestral home of Ireland beginning on June 26 1963 283 Kennedy accepted a grant of armorial bearings from the Chief Herald of Ireland received honorary degrees from the National University of Ireland and Trinity College Dublin attended a State Dinner in Dublin and was conferred with the freedom of the towns and cities of Wexford Cork Dublin Galway and Limerick. 284 285 He visited the cottage at Dunganstown near New Ross County Wexford where his ancestors had lived before emigrating to America. 286 Kennedy was the first foreign leader to address the Houses of the Oireachtas the Irish parliament. 285 287 288 Kennedy later told aides that the trip was the best four days of his life. 289 American University speech World Peace Speech Speech from American University by John F. Kennedy June 10 1963 duration 26:47 Problems playing this file? See media help . On June 10 1963 Kennedy at the high point of his rhetorical powers 290 delivered the commencement address at American University . Also known as A Strategy of Peace not only did Kennedy outline a plan to curb nuclear arms but he also laid out a hopeful yet realistic route for world peace at a time when the U.S. and Soviet Union faced the potential for an escalating nuclear arms race . 291 Kennedy also announced that the Soviets had expressed a desire to negotiate a nuclear test ban treaty and that the U.S. had postponed planned atmospheric tests. 292 Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Main article: Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Kennedy signs the Partial Test Ban Treaty a major milestone in early nuclear disarmament on October 7 1963. Troubled by the long-term dangers of radioactive contamination and nuclear proliferation Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed to negotiate a nuclear test ban treaty originally conceived in Adlai Stevensons 1956 presidential campaign. 293 In their Vienna summit meeting in June 1961 Khrushchev and Kennedy reached an informal understanding against nuclear testing but the Soviet Union began testing nuclear weapons that September. In response the United States conducted tests five days later. 294 Shortly afterwards new U.S. satellites began delivering images that made it clear that the Soviets were substantially behind the U.S. in the arms race. 295 Nevertheless the greater nuclear strength of the U.S. was of little value as long as the Soviet Union perceived itself to be at parity. 296 In July 1963 Kennedy sent W. Averell Harriman to Moscow to negotiate a treaty with the Soviets. 297 The introductory sessions included Khrushchev who later delegated Soviet representation to Andrei Gromyko . It quickly became clear that a comprehensive test ban would not be implemented due largely to the reluctance of the Soviets to allow inspections to verify compliance. 298 Ultimately the United States the United Kingdom and the Soviet Union were the initial signatories to a limited treaty which prohibited atomic testing on the ground in the atmosphere or underwater but not underground. The U.S. Senate approved the treaty on September 23 1963 and Kennedy signed it on October 7 1963. 299 France was quick to declare that it was free to continue developing and testing its nuclear defenses. 300 Domestic policy New Frontier Main article: New Frontier Kennedy signing the Manpower Development and Training Act March 15 1962 Kennedy called his domestic proposals the New Frontier . 301 However Kennedys small margin of victory in the 1960 election his lack of deep connections to influential members of Congress and his administrations focus on foreign policy hindered the passage of New Frontier policies. 302 In 1961 Kennedy prioritized passing five bills: federal assistance for education medical insurance for the elderly housing legislation federal aid to struggling areas and an increase in the federal minimum wage. 303 Kennedys bill to increase the federal minimum wage to 1.25 an hour passed in early 1961 but an amendment inserted by conservative leader from Georgia Carl Vinson exempted laundry workers from the law. 304 Kennedy also won passage of the Area Redevelopment Act and the Housing Act of 1961. The Area Redevelopment Act a 394 million program provided federal funding to economically struggling regions primarily in Appalachia while the Housing Act of 1961 provided funds for urban renewal and public housing and authorized federal mortgage loans to those who did not qualify for public housing. 305 Kennedy proposed a bill providing for 2.3 billion in federal educational aid to the states with more money going to states with lower per capita income . Though the Senate passed the education bill it was defeated in the House by a coalition of Republicans Southern Democrats and Catholics. 306 Kennedys health insurance bill which would have paid for hospitalization and nursing costs for the elderly failed to pass either house of Congress. 307 A bill that would have established the Department of Urban Affairs and Housing was also defeated. 308 In 1962 Kennedy won approval of the Manpower Development and Training Act a three-year program aimed at retraining workers displaced by new technology. Its impact on structural unemployment however was minimal. 305 At the urging of his sister Eunice Kennedy made intellectual disabilities a priority for his administration. In 1963 Congress passed the Community Mental Health Act which provided funding to local mental health community centers and research facilities. 309 Trade policy included both domestic and foreign policy. The 1962 Trade Expansion Act passed Congress by wide majorities. It authorized the president to negotiate tariff reductions on a reciprocal basis of up to 50 percent with the European Common Market . 310 The legislation paved the way for the Kennedy Round of General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade negotiations concluding on June 30 1967 the last day before expiration of the Act. 311 Taxes Further information: Presidency of John F. Kennedy Taxes and the Treasury Walter Heller who served as the chairman of the CEA advocated for a Keynesian -style tax cut designed to help spur economic growth and Kennedy adopted this policy. 312 The idea was that a tax cut would stimulate consumer demand which in turn would lead to higher economic growth lower unemployment and increased federal revenues. 313 To the disappointment of liberals like John Kenneth Galbraith Kennedys embrace of the tax cut shifted his administrations focus away from the proposed old-age health insurance program and other domestic expenditures. 314 In January 1963 Kennedy proposed a tax cut that would reduce the top marginal tax rate from 91 to 65 percent and lower the corporate tax rate from 52 to 47 percent. The predictions according to the Keynesian model indicated the cuts would decrease income taxes by about 10 billion and corporate taxes by about 3.5 billion. The plan included reforms designed to reduce the impact of itemized deductions as well as provisions to help the elderly and handicapped. Republicans and many Southern Democrats opposed the bill calling for simultaneous reductions in expenditures but debate continued throughout 1963. 315 Three months after Kennedy died Johnson pushed the plan through Congress. The Revenue Act of 1964 lowered the top individual rate to 70 percent and the top corporate rate to 48 percent. 316 Economy See also: Recession of 19601961 and Kennedy Slide of 1962 President Kennedy delivers his State of the Union Address; c. January 14 1963 . Kennedy ended a period of tight fiscal policies loosening monetary policy to keep interest rates down and to encourage growth of the economy. 317 He presided over the first government budget to top the 100 billion mark in 1962 and his first budget in 1961 resulted in the nations first non-war non-recession deficit . 318 The economy which had been through two recessions in three years and was in one when Kennedy took office accelerated notably throughout his administration. Despite low inflation and interest rates the GDP had grown by an average of only 2.2 per annum during the Eisenhower administration scarcely more than population growth at the time and it had declined by 1 during Eisenhowers last twelve months in office. 319 The economy turned around and prospered during Kennedys presidency. The GDP expanded by an average of 5.5 from early 1961 to late 1963 319 while inflation remained steady at around 1 and unemployment eased. 320 Industrial production rose by 15 and motor vehicle sales increased by 40. 321 This sustained rate of growth in GDP and industry continued until around 1969. 319 Kennedy was proud that his Labor Department helped keep wages steady in the steel industry but was outraged in April 1962 when Roger Blough the president of U.S. Steel quietly informed Kennedy that his company would raise prices. 322 In response Attorney General Robert Kennedy began a price-fixing investigation against U.S. Steel and President Kennedy convinced other steel companies to rescind their price increases until finally even U.S. Steel isolated and in danger of being undersold agreed to rescind its own price increase. 323 An editorial in The New York Times praised Kennedys actions and stated that the steel industrys price increase imperiled the economic welfare of the country by inviting a tidal wave of inflation. 324 Nevertheless the administrations Bureau of Budget reported the price increase would have caused a net gain for the GDP as well as a net budget surplus. 325 The stock market which had steadily declined since Kennedys election in 1960 dropped 10 shortly after the administrations action on the steel industry took place. 326 Civil rights movement Further information: Presidency of John F. Kennedy Civil rights See also: Civil rights movement In May 1961 Kennedy appointed Thurgood Marshall to the U.S. Court of Appeals . Kennedy verbally supported civil rights during his 1960 presidential campaign; he telephoned Coretta Scott King wife of Martin Luther King Jr. who had been jailed while trying to integrate a department store lunch counter. Robert Kennedy called Georgia Governor Ernest Vandiver and obtained Kings release from prison which drew additional Black support to his brothers candidacy. 327 Recognizing that conservative Southern Democrats could block legislation Kennedy did not introduce civil rights legislation on taking office. 328 He needed their support to pass his economic and foreign policy agendas and to support his reelection in 1964. 329 Kennedy did appoint many Blacks to office including civil rights attorney Thurgood Marshall to the U.S. Court of Appeals . 330 Kennedy believed the grassroots movement for civil rights would anger many Southern Whites and make it more difficult to pass civil rights laws in Congress and he distanced himself from it. 331 As articulated by Robert Kennedy the administrations early priority was to keep the president out of this civil rights mess. 332 Civil rights movement participants mainly those on the front line in the South viewed Kennedy as lukewarm 330 especially concerning the Freedom Riders . In May 1961 the Congress of Racial Equality led by James Farmer organized integrated Freedom Rides to test a Supreme Court case ruling that declared segregation on interstate transportation illegal. 333 The Riders were repeatedly met with mob violence including by federal and state law enforcement officers. 330 Kennedy assigned federal marshals to protect the Riders rather than using federal troops or uncooperative FBI agents. 330 Kennedy feared sending federal troops would stir up hated memories of Reconstruction among conservative Southern whites. 330 The Justice Department then petitioned the Interstate Commerce Commission ICC to adhere to federal law. By September 1961 the ICC ruled in favor of the petition. 334 On March 6 1961 Kennedy signed Executive Order 10925 which required government contractors to take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed and that employees are treated during employment without regard to their race creed color or national origin. 335 It established the Presidents Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity . 336 In September 1962 James Meredith enrolled at the all-White University of Mississippi but was prevented from entering. In response Attorney General Robert Kennedy sent 400 federal marshals. 337 The Ole Miss riot of 1962 left two dead and dozens injured prompting Kennedy to send in 3 000 troops to quell the riot. 338 Meredith did finally enroll in class. Kennedy regretted not sending in troops earlier and he began to doubt whether the evils of Reconstruction he had been taught or believed were true. 330 On November 20 1962 Kennedy signed Executive Order 11063 which prohibited racial discrimination in federally supported housing. 339 Kennedys Report to the American People on Civil Rights c. June 11 1963 On June 11 1963 Kennedy intervened when Alabama Governor George Wallace blocked the doorway to the University of Alabama to stop two Black students Vivian Malone and James Hood from attending. Wallace moved aside only after being confronted by Deputy Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach and the Alabama National Guard which had just been federalized by order of the president. That evening Kennedy gave his famous Report to the American People on Civil Rights speech on national television and radio launching his initiative for civil rights legislationto provide equal access to public schools and other facilities and greater protection of voting rights. 340 341 His proposals became part of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 . The day ended with the murder of an NAACP leader Medgar Evers in Mississippi. 342 As Kennedy had predicted the day after his TV speech and in reaction to it House Majority leader Carl Albert called to advise him that his two-year signature effort in Congress to combat poverty in Appalachia had been defeated primarily by the votes of Southern Democrats and Republicans. 343 When Arthur Schlesinger Jr. complimented Kennedy on his remarks Kennedy bitterly replied Yes and look at what happened to area development the very next day in the House. He then added But of course I had to give that speech and Im glad that I did. 344 On June 16 The New York Times published an editorial which argued that while Kennedy had initially moved too slowly and with little evidence of deep moral commitment in regards to civil rights he now demonstrated a genuine sense of urgency about eradicating racial discrimination from our national life. 345 Kennedy meetings with leaders of the March on Washington in the Oval Office c. August 28 1963 A crowd of over 250 000 predominantly African Americans gathered in Washington for the civil rights March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom on August 28 1963. Kennedy initially opposed the march fearing it would have a negative effect on the prospects for the civil rights bills pending in Congress. These fears were heightened just prior to the march when FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover presented Kennedy with reports that some of Kings close advisers specifically Jack ODell and Stanley Levison were communists. 346 When King ignored the administrations warning Robert Kennedy authorized the FBI to wiretap King and other leaders of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference . 347 Although Kennedy only gave written approval for limited wiretapping of Kings phones on a trial basis for a month or so 348 Hoover extended the clearance so his men were unshackled to look for evidence in any areas of Kings life they deemed worthy. 349 The Department of Justice was assigned to coordinate the federal governments involvement in the March on Washington on August 28; several hundred thousand dollars to were channeled to the six sponsors of the March. 350 To ensure a peaceful demonstration the organizers and the president personally edited speeches that were inflammatory and collaborated on all aspects related to times and venues. Thousands of troops were placed on standby. Kennedy watched Kings speech on TV and was very impressed. The March was considered a triumph of managed protest and not one arrest relating to the demonstration occurred. Afterwards the March leaders accepted an invitation to the White House to meet with Kennedy and photos were taken. Kennedy felt that the March was a victory for him as well and bolstered the chances for his civil rights bill. 350 Three weeks later on Sunday September 15 a bomb exploded at the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham; by the end of the day four Black children had died in the explosion and two others were shot to death in the aftermath. 351 Due to this resurgent violence the civil rights legislation underwent some drastic amendments that critically endangered any prospects for passage of the bill to the outrage of Kennedy. He called the congressional leaders to the White House and by the following day the original bill without the additions had enough votes to get it out of the House committee. 352 Gaining Republican support Senator Everett Dirksen promised the legislation would be brought to a vote preventing a Senate filibuster . 353 On July 2 1964 the guarantees Kennedy proposed in his June 1963 speech became federal law when President Johnson signed the Civil Rights Act. 353 Status of women Kennedy signing the Equal Pay Act of 1963 into law During the 1960 presidential campaign Kennedy endorsed the concept of equal pay for equal work . 354 In December 1961 Kennedy signed an executive order creating the Presidential Commission on the Status of Women to advise him on issues concerning the status of women. 355 Former First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt led the commission. The commissions final report was issued in October 1963; it documented the legal and cultural discrimination women in America faced and made several policy recommendations to bring about change. 356 On June 10 1963 Kennedy signed the Equal Pay Act of 1963 which amended the Fair Labor Standards Act and abolished wage disparity based on sex. 357 Crime Further information: Presidency of John F. Kennedy Crime Under the leadership of the attorney general the Kennedy administration shifted the focus of the Justice Department the FBI and the IRS to organized crime . Kennedy won congressional approval for five bills i.e. Federal Wire Act of 1961 designed to crack down on interstate racketeering gambling and the transportation of firearms. 358 359 On March 22 1962 Kennedy signed into law a bill abolishing the mandatory death penalty for first degree murder in the District of Columbia the only remaining jurisdiction in the United States with such a penalty. 360 The death penalty has not been applied in D.C. since 1957 and has now been abolished. 361 Agriculture Kennedy had relatively little interest in agricultural issues but he sought to remedy the issue of overproduction boost the income of farmers and lower federal expenditures on agriculture. Under the direction of Secretary of Agriculture Orville Freeman the administration sought to limit the production of farmers but these proposals were generally defeated in Congress. To increase demand for domestic agricultural products and help the impoverished Kennedy launched a pilot Food Stamp program and expanded the federal school lunch program . 362 Native American relations Further information: Kinzua Dam Native Americans and Seneca nation Kinzua Dam Construction of the Kinzua Dam flooded 10 000 acres 4 000 hectares of Seneca nation land that they had occupied under the Treaty of 1794 and forced 600 Seneca to relocate to Salamanca New York . Kennedy was asked by the American Civil Liberties Union to halt the project but he declined citing a critical need for flood control. He expressed concern about the plight of the Seneca and directed government agencies to assist in obtaining more land damages and assistance to mitigate their displacement. 363 364 Space policy Further information: Presidency of John F. Kennedy Space policy See also: Space Race and Space policy of the United States Wernher von Braun explains the Saturn system to President Kennedy during his tour at the Cape Canaveral Missile Test Annex on November 16 1963 In the aftermath of the Soviet launch of Sputnik 1 the first artificial Earth satellite NASA proposed a crewed lunar landing by the early 1970s. 365 Funding for the program known as the Apollo program was far from certain as Eisenhower held an ambivalent attitude. 366 Early in his presidency Kennedy was poised to dismantle the crewed space program but he postponed any decision out of deference to Vice President Johnson who had been a strong supporter of the program in the Senate. 367 With Jerome Wiesner Johnson was given a major role in overseeing the administrations space policy and at Johnsons recommendation Kennedy appointed James E. Webb to head NASA. 368 In Kennedys State of the Union address in 1961 he suggested international cooperation in space. Khrushchev declined as the Soviets did not wish to reveal the status of their rocketry and space capabilities. 369 In April 1961 Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first person to fly in space reinforcing American fears about being left behind by the Soviet Union. 370 Less than a month later Alan Shepard became the first American to travel into space strengthening Kennedys confidence in NASA. 371 The following year John Glenn aboard the Mercury craft Friendship 7 became the first American to orbit the Earth. 372 In the aftermath of Gagarins flight as well as the failed Bay of Pigs invasion Kennedy felt pressured to respond to the perceived erosion of American prestige. He asked Johnson to explore the feasibility of beating the Soviets to the Moon . Though he was concerned about the programs costs Kennedy agreed to Johnsons recommendation that the U.S. commit to a crewed lunar landing as the major objective of the space program. In a May 25 speech to Congress Kennedy declared 371 ... I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal before this decade is out of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to the Earth. No single space project in this period will be more impressive to mankind or more important for the long-range exploration of space; and none will be so difficult or expensive to accomplish. 373 Full text Kennedy speaks at Rice University on September 12 1962 Though Gallup polling showed that many in the public were skeptical of the necessity of the Apollo program 374 members of Congress were strongly supportive in 1961 and approved a major increase in NASAs funding. Webb began reorganizing NASA increasing its staffing level and building two new centers: a Launch Operations Center for the large Moon rocket northwest of Cape Canaveral Air Force Station and a Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston. Kennedy took the latter occasion as an opportunity to deliver another speech promoting the space effort on September 12 1962 in which he said: No nation which expects to be the leader of other nations can expect to stay behind in this race for space. ... We choose to go to the Moon in this decade and do the other things not because they are easy but because they are hard. 375 Full text On November 21 1962 in a cabinet meeting with Webb and other officials Kennedy explained that the Moon shot was important for reasons of international prestige and that the expense was justified. 376 On July 20 1969 almost six years after Kennedys death Apollo 11 landed the first crewed spacecraft on the Moon. 377 Judicial appointments Main articles: John F. Kennedy Supreme Court candidates and List of federal judges appointed by John F. Kennedy In 1962 Kennedy appointed justices Byron White and Arthur Goldberg to the Supreme Court . 378 Additionally Kennedy appointed 21 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals and 102 judges to the United States district courts . 379 Assassination Main article: Assassination of John F. Kennedy For a chronological guide see Timeline of the John F. Kennedy assassination . Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas at 12:30 p.m. Central Standard Time on November 22 1963. 380 He was in Texas on a political trip to smooth over frictions in the Democratic Party between liberals Ralph Yarborough and Don Yarborough no relation and conservative John Connally . 381 Traveling in a presidential motorcade through Dealey Plaza he was shot once in the back the bullet exiting via his throat and once in the head. 382 383 The Kennedys and the Connallys in the presidential limousine moments before the assassination in Dallas Kennedy was taken to Parkland Hospital where he was pronounced dead 30 minutes later at 1:00 p.m. 384 He was 46 years old. Lee Harvey Oswald was arrested for the murder of police officer J. D. Tippit and was subsequently charged with Kennedys assassination. 385 He denied shooting anyone claiming he was a patsy 386 387 and was shot dead by Jack Ruby on November 24 before he could be prosecuted. 388 Ruby was arrested and convicted for the murder of Oswald. Ruby successfully appealed his conviction but died of cancer on January 3 1967 while the date for his new trial was being set. 389 President Johnson quickly issued an executive order to create the Warren Commission chaired by Chief Justice Earl Warren to investigate the assassination. The commission concluded that Oswald acted alone in killing Kennedy and that Oswald was not part of any conspiracy. 390 391 These conclusions are disputed by many. 392 A Gallup Poll in November 2013 showed 61 believed in a conspiracy and only 30 thought that Oswald did it alone. 393 In 1979 the U.S. House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded with one third of the committee dissenting that Kennedy was probably assassinated as a result of a conspiracy . The committee was unable to identify the other gunmen or the extent of the conspiracy. This conclusion was based largely on audio recordings of the shooting. 394 Subsequently investigative reports from the FBI and a specially appointed National Academy of Sciences Committee determined that reliable acoustic data do not support a conclusion that there was a second gunman. 395 The Justice Department concluded that no persuasive evidence can be identified to support the theory of a conspiracy . 396 Funeral Main articles: State funeral of John F. Kennedy and List of dignitaries at the state funeral of John F. Kennedy Kennedys family leaving his funeral at the U.S. Capitol Building Kennedys body was brought back to Washington. On November 23 six military pallbearers carried the flag-draped coffin into the East Room of the White House where he lay in repose for 24 hours. 397 398 Then the coffin was carried on a horse-drawn caisson to the Capitol to lie in state. Throughout the day and night hundreds of thousands lined up to view the guarded casket 399 400 with a quarter million passing through the rotunda during the 18 hours of lying in state. 399 Kennedys funeral service was held on November 25 at St. Matthews Cathedral in Washington D.C. 401 The Requiem Mass was led by Cardinal Richard Cushing then the Archbishop of Boston . 401 It was attended by approximately 1 200 guests including representatives from over 90 countries. 402 403 After the service Kennedy was buried at Arlington National Cemetery in Arlington County Virginia . 404 Personal life family and reputation Further information: Kennedy family The Kennedy brothers: Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy Senator Ted Kennedy and President John F. Kennedy in 1963 The Kennedy family is one of the most established political families in the United States having produced a president three senators three ambassadors and multiple other representatives and politicians. While a congressman Kennedy embarked on a seven-week trip to India Japan Vietnam and Israel in 1951 at which point he became close with his then 25-year-old brother Robert as well as his 27-year-old sister Patricia. Because they were several years apart in age the brothers had previously seen little of each other. This 25 000-mile 40 000 km trip was the first extended time they had spent together and resulted in their becoming best friends. 405 Robert would eventually serve as his brothers attorney general and closest presidential advisor; 405 he would later run for president in 1968 before his assassination while another Kennedy brother Ted ran for president in 1980 . 406 Kennedys nephew and Roberts son Robert Jr. ran for president in 2024 . 407 408 409 410 Wife and children Kennedy met his wife Jacqueline Lee Jackie Bouvier when he was a congressman. Charles L. Bartlett a journalist introduced the pair at a dinner party. 411 They were married on September 12 1953 at St. Marys Church in Newport Rhode Island . 412 413 The newlyweds honeymooned in Mexico before settling in their new home Hickory Hill in McLean Virginia . 414 In 1956 they sold their Hickory Hill estate to Kennedys brother Robert and bought a townhouse in Georgetown . 415 416 The Kennedys also resided at an apartment in Boston their legal residence during Johns congressional career 417 418 and a summer home in Cape Cod Massachusetts . 419 After a miscarriage in 1955 and a stillbirth in 1956 their daughter Arabella their daughter Caroline was born in 1957. John Jr. nicknamed John-John by the press as a child was born in late November 1960 17 days after his father was elected. John Jr. died in 1999 when the small plane he was piloting crashed . 420 In August 1963 Jackie gave birth to a son Patrick . However he died after two days due to complications from birth. 421 Popular image The First Family in Hyannis Port Massachusetts 1962 Kennedy and his wife were younger than the presidents and first ladies who preceded them and both were popular in the media culture in ways more common to pop singers and movie stars than politicians influencing fashion trends and becoming the subjects of photo spreads in popular magazines. Although Eisenhower had allowed presidential press conferences to be filmed for television Kennedy was the first president to ask for them to be broadcast live and made good use of the medium. 422 In 1961 the Radio-Television News Directors Association presented Kennedy with its highest honor the Paul White Award in recognition of his open relationship with the media. 423 The Kennedys invited a range of artists writers and intellectuals to White House dinners raising the profile of the arts in America. On the White House lawn they established a swimming pool and tree house while Caroline attended a preschool with 10 other children inside the home. 424 425 Vaughn Meader s First Family comedy album which parodied the president the first lady their family and the administration sold about four million copies. 426 Health Despite a privileged youth Kennedy was plagued by childhood diseases including whooping cough chicken pox measles and ear infections. These ailments compelled him to spend a considerable amount of time convalescing . Three months prior to his third birthday in 1920 Kennedy came down with scarlet fever a highly contagious and life-threatening disease and was admitted to Boston City Hospital . 427 15 Kennedy and Jackie leaving the hospital following his spinal surgery December 1954 During his years at Choate Kennedy was beset by health problems that culminated with his emergency hospitalization in 1934 at Yale New Haven Hospital where doctors suspected leukemia. 428 While sick he became a passionate reader and also a fatalist . 429 In June 1934 he was admitted to the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota; the ultimate diagnosis was colitis . 428 After withdrawing from Princeton University Kennedy was hospitalized for observation at Peter Bent Brigham Hospital in Boston. He then spent the spring of 1936 working as a ranch hand outside Benson Arizona under Jack Speiden . 430 Years after Kennedys death it was revealed that in September 1947 when he was 30 and in his first term in Congress he was diagnosed by Sir Daniel Davis at The London Clinic with Addisons disease . Davis estimated that Kennedy would not live for another year while Kennedy hoped he could live for ten. 431 In 1966 White House physician Janet Travell revealed that Kennedy also had hypothyroidism . The presence of two endocrine diseases raises the possibility that Kennedy had autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 2 . 432 Kennedy suffered from chronic severe back pain for which he had surgery. His condition may have had diplomatic repercussions as he appears to have been taking a combination of drugs to treat back pain during the 1961 Vienna Summit . The combination included hormones animal organ cells steroids vitamins enzymes and amphetamines and possible side effects included hyperactivity hypertension impaired judgment nervousness and mood swings. 433 Kennedy at one time was regularly seen by three doctors one of whom Max Jacobson at first was unknown to the other two as his mode of treatment was controversial 434 and used for the most severe bouts of back pain. 435 Into late 1961 disagreements existed among Kennedys doctors concerning the balance of medication and exercise. Kennedy preferred the former because he was short on time and desired immediate relief. 296 The presidents primary White House physician George G. Burkley set up gym equipment in the White House basement where Kennedy did stretching exercises thrice weekly. 436 Details of these and other medical problems were not publicly disclosed during Kennedys lifetime. 437 Burkley realized that treatments by Jacobson and Travell including excessive use of steroids and amphetamines were medically inappropriate and took action to remove Kennedy from their care. 438 External videos Presentation by Robert Dallek on An Unfinished Life: John F. Kennedy 1917-1963 May 20 2003 C-SPAN In 2002 Robert Dallek wrote an extensive history of Kennedys health based on a collection of Kennedy-associated papers from 1955 to 1963 including X-rays and prescription records from Travell. According to Travells records during his presidential years Kennedy suffered from high fevers; stomach colon and prostate issues; abscesses; high cholesterol; and adrenal problems. Travell kept a Medicine Administration Record cataloging Kennedys medications: injected and ingested corticosteroids for his adrenal insufficiency; procaine shots and ultrasound treatments and hot packs for his back; Lomotil Metamucil paregoric phenobarbital testosterone and trasentine to control his diarrhea abdominal discomfort and weight loss; penicillin and other antibiotics for his urinary-tract infections and an abscess; and Tuinal to help him sleep. 428 Affairs and friendships Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy Marilyn Monroe and John F. Kennedy talk during the presidents May 19 1962 early birthday party where Monroe publicly serenaded Kennedy with Happy Birthday Mr. President Kennedy was single in the 1940s while having relationships with Danish journalist Inga Arvad 439 and actress Gene Tierney . 440 During his time as a senator he had an affair with Gunilla von Post who later wrote that the future president tried to end his marriage to be with her before having any children with his wife. 441 Kennedy was also reported to have had affairs with Marilyn Monroe 442 Judith Campbell 443 Mary Pinchot Meyer 444 Marlene Dietrich 30 White House intern Mimi Alford 445 and his wifes press secretary Pamela Turnure . 446 There have been several conspiracy theories surrounding the deaths of Monroe and Meyer alleging that Kennedy may have had a part in their deaths. 447 The full extent of Kennedys relationship with Monroe who in 1962 famously sang Happy Birthday Mr. President at Kennedys birthday celebration at Madison Square Garden is not known though it has been reported that they spent a weekend together in March 1962 while he was staying at Bing Crosby s house. 448 Furthermore people at the White House switchboard noted that Monroe had called Kennedy during 1962. 449 J. Edgar Hoover the FBI director received reports about Kennedys indiscretions. 450 These included an alleged tryst with an East German spy Ellen Rometsch . According to historian Michael Beschloss in July 1963 Hoover reportedly informed Robert Kennedy about the affair with a woman suspected as a Soviet intelligence agent someone linked to East German intelligence. Robert reportedly took the matter sufficiently seriously to raise it with leading Democratic and Republican figures in Congress. 451 452 Former Secret Service agent Larry Newman recalled morale problems that the presidents indiscretions engendered within the Secret Service. 453 Kennedy inspired affection and loyalty from the members of his team and his supporters. 454 According to Reeves this included the logistics of Kennedys liaisons ... which required secrecy and devotion rare in the annals of the energetic service demanded by successful politicians. 455 Kennedy believed that his friendly relationship with members of the press would help protect him from public revelations about his sex life. 456 Sports President John F. Kennedy with the Boston Celtics January 1963 Kennedy was a fan of Major League Baseball s Boston Red Sox and the National Basketball Association s Boston Celtics . 457 458 Growing up on Cape Cod Kennedy and his siblings developed a lifelong passion for sailing . 459 He also took up golf ; playing regularly at the Hyannisport Club in Massachusetts and the Palm Beach Country Club in Florida. 457 460 Religion See also: John F. Kennedy 1960 presidential campaign Religion Kennedy was the first Catholic elected to the presidency. 461 During his childhood he attended St. Aidans Church in Brookline Massachusetts where he was baptized on June 19 1917. 462 Historical evaluations and legacy The John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum in Boston Presidency Further information: Presidency of John F. Kennedy Historical reputation Historians and political scientists tend to rank Kennedy as an above-average president and he is usually the highest-ranking president who served less than one full term. 463 A 2014 survey from The Washington Post of 162 members of the American Political Science Association s Presidents and Executive Politics section ranked Kennedy 14th highest overall among the 43 persons who have been president including then-president Barack Obama . The survey found Kennedy to be the most overrated U.S. president. 464 A 2017 C-SPAN survey has Kennedy ranked among the top ten presidents. 465 A 2023 Gallup Inc. survey showed Kennedy with a retrospective approval rating of 90 percent the highest of all U.S. presidents in recent history. 466 Assessments of his policies are mixed. 467 468 Many of Kennedys legislative proposals were passed after his death during the Johnson administration and Kennedys death gave those proposals a powerful moral component. 469 Kennedy came in third behind Martin Luther King Jr. and Mother Teresa in Gallups List of Widely Admired People of the 20th century. 470 471 In 1961 he was awarded the Laetare Medal by the University of Notre Dame considered the most prestigious award for American Catholics . 472 He was posthumously awarded the Pacem in Terris Award Latin : Peace on Earth and the Presidential Medal of Freedom . 473 Camelot Official White House portrait of Kennedy by Aaron Shikler The term Camelot is often used to describe his presidency reflecting both the mythic grandeur accorded Kennedy in death and powerful nostalgia for that era of American history. 474 According to Richard Dean Burns and Joseph M. Siracusa the most popular theme surrounding Kennedys legacy is its replay of the legend of King Arthur and Camelot from Arthurian Literature . 475 In an interview following Kennedys death his widow Jacqueline mentioned his affection for the Broadway musical Camelot and quoted its closing lines: Dont let it be forgot that once there was a spot for one brief shining moment that was known as Camelot. 476 477 Critics especially historians have mocked the Camelot myth as a distortion of Kennedys actions beliefs and policies. However in the public memory the years of Kennedys presidency are still seen as a brief brilliant and shining moment. 478 479 Memorials and eponyms Main article: List of things named after John F. Kennedy Examples of the extensive list include: Idlewild Airport in Queens New York City renamed John F. Kennedy International Airport on December 24 1963 NASA Launch Operations Center in Merritt Island Florida named the John F. Kennedy Space Center on November 29 1963. USS John F. Kennedy CV-67 U.S. Navy aircraft carrier ordered in April 1964 launched May 1967 decommissioned August 2007; nicknamed Big John Kennedy half dollar first minted in 1964 John F. Kennedy School of Government part of Harvard University renamed in 1966 John F. Kennedy Federal Building in the Government Center section of Boston opened in 1966 John Fitzgerald Kennedy Memorial opened in 1970 in Dallas National cultural center was named John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in 1964 opened in 1971 in Washington D.C. John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum on Columbia Point in Boston ; opened in 1979 Statue of John F. Kennedy by Isabel McIlvain on the grounds of the Massachusetts State House in Boston; dedicated on May 29 1990. Works Books Kennedy John F. 1940. Why England Slept . W. Funk. ISBN 978-1-44-084990-9 . Kennedy John F. 1956. Profiles in Courage . Harper Brothers. ISBN 978-0-06-095544-1 . Kennedy John F. 1958. A Nation of Immigrants . Anti-Defamation League. ISBN 978-0-06-144754-9 . Select speeches Kennedy comments on the possible prevention of the Cold War President Kennedy comments on the possible prevention of the Cold War Kennedys message to Turkey Kennedys message to Turkish President Cemal Gursel and The Turkish People on the Anniversary of the Death of Kemal Ataturk November 10 1963 accompanying text Problems playing these files? See media help . Announcement to go to the Moon Announcement by John F. Kennedy to go to the Moon duration 00:11 Secret Societies speech JFK Secret Societies speech Problems playing these files? See media help . See also Cultural depictions of John F. Kennedy Electoral history of John F. Kennedy History of the United States 19451964 Kennedy Doctrine LincolnKennedy coincidences urban legend List of United States presidential assassination attempts and plots Presidential transition of John F. Kennedy Presidents of the United States on U.S. postage stamps Senator youre no Jack Kennedy retort by Senator Lloyd Bentsen 1988 VP debate Notes Theodore Roosevelt was nine months younger when he first rose to the office from the vice presidency on September 14 1901 in the wake of his predecessors assassination but he was not elected to the office until 1904 when he was 46. 2 After the war Kennedy contacted the captain of the Amagiri Kohei Hanami and formed a friendship with him. Hanami later supported Kennedys election campaign. 50 References Citations a b John F. Kennedy Miscellaneous Information . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum. Archived from the original on August 31 2009 . Retrieved February 22 2012 . Hoberek Andrew ed. 2015. The Cambridge Companion to John F. Kennedy . Cambridge Companions to American Studies. New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 1. ISBN 978-1-107-66316-9 . A History of 83 Beals Street Brookline Massachusetts: Birthplace of John Fitzgerald Kennedy . National Park Service . Archived from the original on January 29 2024 . Retrieved January 29 2024 . Dallek 2003 p. 20. Patrick Joseph Kennedy Personal Papers . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum . Archived from the original on January 29 2024 . Retrieved January 29 2024 . Dallek 2003 pp. 813. Meagher Michael 2011. John F. Kennedy: A Biography . Greenwood. pp. 8 . John F. Kennedy . Encyclopedia Britannica . November 22 2023. Archived from the original on January 18 2017 . Retrieved January 16 2017 . MacGregor Burns James 1960. John Kennedy: A Political Profile . pp. 2223. Logevall Fredrik 2020. JFK Coming of Age in the American Century 1917-1956 . Random House. pp. 5051. ISBN 978-0-8129-9713-2 . Logevall Fredrik 2020. JFK Coming of Age in the American Century 1917-1956 . Random House. p. 57. ISBN 978-0-8129-9713-2 . a b John F. Kennedy: Early Years . Archived from the original on April 29 2017 . Retrieved April 17 2017 . Thomas Evan. Robert Kennedy: His Life . Simon Schuster. p. 33. Kennedy Edward M. 2009. True Compass: A Memoir . Twelve; First edition. p. 37 . ISBN 978-0-446-53925-8 . a b Life of John F. Kennedy . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on February 6 2019 . Retrieved February 7 2019 . This article incorporates text from this source which is in the public domain . OBrien 2005 p. 31. Dallek 2003 p. 34. Dallek 2003 p. 33. Logevall Fredrik 2020. JFK - Volume One . Penguin . p. 81. ISBN 978-0-241-97201-4 . a b Kenney 2000 p. 11. Logevall Fredrik 2020. JFK - Volume One . Penguin . p. 112. ISBN 978-0-241-97201-4 . John F. Kennedys Princeton University undergraduate alumni file . Mudd Manuscript Library Blog . November 22 2013. Archived from the original on August 1 2016 . Retrieved December 21 2015 . Logevall Fredrik 2020. JFK - Volume One . Penguin . p. 131. ISBN 978-0-241-97201-4 . Brinkley 2012 pp. 14. Wills Chuck 2009. Jack Kennedy: The Illustrated Life of a President . Chronicle Books LLC. p. 25. Dallek 2003 p. 54. OBrien 2005 p. 93. Logevall Fredrik 2020. JFK - Volume One . Penguin . p. 220. ISBN 978-0-241-97201-4 . Logevall Fredrik 2020. JFK - Volume One . Penguin . pp. 225226. ISBN 978-0-241-97201-4 . a b Dallek 2003 p. 58. Obama joins list of seven presidents with Harvard degrees . Harvard Gazette . Harvard University . November 6 2008. Archived from the original on August 1 2016 . Retrieved February 24 2012 . Dallek 2003 pp. 6166. Logevall Fredrik 2020. JFK - Volume One . Penguin . pp. 269270. ISBN 978-0-241-97201-4 . Brinkley 2012 pp. 1517. Brinkley 2012 pp. 183. Kenney 2000 p. 18. Dallek 2003 p. 68. Kenney 2000 p. 21. OBrien 2005 pp. 114 117118. John F. Kennedy Jr . Veteran Tributes. Archived from the original on August 1 2016 . Retrieved August 1 2016 . a b c d President John Fitzgerald Kennedy 19171963 . Michael W. Pocock and MaritimeQuest.com. Archived from the original on August 1 2016 . Retrieved August 1 2016 . a b c d e f John Fitzgerald Kennedy 29 May 1917 22 November 1963 . Naval History and Heritage Command. Archived from the original on August 1 2016 . Retrieved August 1 2016 . Ballard 2002 pp. 12 36. a b Brinkley 2012 pp. 18. Donovan 2001 pp. 19 20. USS PT 109 . Michael W. Pocock and MaritimeQuest.com. Archived from the original on August 1 2016 . Retrieved August 1 2016 . Donovan 2001 pp. 99 100. USS PT-109 Final Crew List . Michael W. Pocock and MaritimeQuest.com. Archived from the original on August 1 2016 . Retrieved August 1 2016 . Donovan 2001 pp. 106. . American View in Japanese. Embassy of the United States of America in Japan. April 5 2015. Archived from the original on July 26 2020 . Retrieved July 26 2020 . Donovan 2001 pp. 106107 119. Donovan 2001 pp. 106107 124. Doyle 2015 pp. 66106 134139. Doyle 2015 pp. 143148. a b Brinkley 2012 pp. 19. a b John F. Kennedy and PT 109 . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on August 1 2016 . Retrieved July 9 2023 . Hersey John June 17 1944. Survival . The New Yorker . pp. 3144. Donovan 2001 pp. 172184 189. Doyle 2015 pp. 193. Brinkley 2012 pp. 20. Record of John F. Kennedys Naval Service . Naval History Heritage Command . June 18 2002. Archived from the original on May 27 2012 . Retrieved July 9 2023 . OBrien 2005 pp. 179 180. Peoria Open Space Master Plan: Chapter 4 Historic and Cultural Resources PDF . Archived from the original PDF on February 1 2014 . Retrieved January 22 2014 . JFK: A Timeline of His Life 19171963 . St. Petersburg Times. Archived from the original on August 1 2016 . Retrieved August 1 2016 . Dallek 2003 p. 98. Dallek 2003 p. 106107. Joseph P. Kennedy Jr . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum . Archived from the original on December 13 2023 . Retrieved December 13 2023 . OBrien 2005 pp. 175. Brinkley 2012 pp. 21. Logevall Fredrik 2020. JFK - Volume One . Penguin . pp. 379380. ISBN 978-0-241-97201-4 . OBrien 2005 p. 180. Daum 2008 pp. 127. Dallek 2003 p. 104. Dallek 2003 p. 118. Dallek 2003 p. 122. Sorensen Ted 1965. Kennedy . Harper Row. pp. 21 . ISBN 978-1-56852-035-3 . Massachusetts Secretary of Commonwealth: Election Statistics 1946 . Logevall Fredrik 2020. JFK: Coming of Age in the American Century 1917-1956 . Random House. p. 424. Brinkley 2012 pp. 2426. a b Caro Robert 2012. 2. The Rich Mans Son . The Passage of Power: The Years of Lyndon Johnson . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. Dallek 2003 p. 136137. Brinkley 2012 pp. 2629. Dallek 2003 p. 160. Remarks Of Representative John F. Kennedy At The Philip J. Durkin Testimonial Dinner Salem Massachusetts January 30 1949 . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum . Archived from the original on June 1 2023 . Retrieved June 1 2023 . Fast Facts about John F. Kennedy . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on July 30 2023 . Retrieved February 7 2019 . JFK John F. Kennedy boy scouts . January 2 1961. Archived from the original on April 14 2018 . Retrieved April 14 2018 . Remarks Of Representative John F. Kennedy In The House Of Representatives Washington D.C. November 20 1947 . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum . Archived from the original on June 3 2023 . Retrieved June 3 2023 . Dallek 2003 p. 159165. Meagher Michael 2011. John F. Kennedy: A Biography . Greenwood. pp. 35 . Dallek 2003 p. 168. OBrien 2005 p. 254. Giglio 2006 p. 9. Brinkley 2012 pp. 2931. Shaw John T. October 15 2013. JFK in the Senate . St. Martins Press. p. 41. ISBN 978-0-230-34183-8 . Kennedy Robert F. Jr. May 15 2018. American Values: Lessons I Learned from My Family . Harper. p. 142. ISBN 978-0-06-084834-7 . a b John F. Kennedy . Encyclopdia Britannica . Archived from the original on January 18 2017 . Retrieved January 16 2017 . Kenney 2000 p. 29. a b Edward Smith Jean March 1967. Kennedy and Defense The formative years . Air University Review . Archived from the original on December 12 2008 . Retrieved September 18 2007 . Tofel Richard J. May 9 2008. In His Own Words . The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on February 23 2015 . Retrieved March 28 2010 . Savage Sean J. 2004. JFK LBJ and the Democratic Party . State University of New York Press. p. 11. Economic Problems Of New England May 1953: 18-20 . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum . Archived from the original on June 18 2023 . Retrieved June 18 2023 . Bryant 2006b p. 45. a b Dallek 2003 p. 18182. Savage Sean J. 2015. The Senator from New England: The Rise of JFK . State University of New York Press. p. 22. MacGregor Burns James 1960. John Kennedy: A Political Profile . pp. 120121. The U.S. Senator John F. Kennedy Story . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on August 2 2016 . Retrieved August 25 2015 . Rachel Carson and JFK an Environmental Tag Team . Audubon . May 8 2012. Archived from the original on January 7 2024 . Retrieved March 31 2024 . Savage Sean J. 2015. The Senator from New England: The Rise of JFK . State University of New York Press. p. 71. John F. Kennedy . Encyclopedia Britannica . Archived from the original on June 5 2023 . Retrieved June 5 2023 . Savage Sean J. 2015. The Senator from New England: The Rise of JFK . State University of New York Press. pp. 48 5455. Dallek 2003 p. 18283. Dallek 2003 p. 189. Dallek Robert 1991. Lone Star Rising: Lyndon Johnson and His Times 1908-1960 . Oxford University Press. p. 458. OBrien 2005 pp. 27479 39499. Dallek 2003 p. 201. Brinkley 2012 pp. 3435. Shaw John T. JFK in the Senate: Pathway to the Presidency . Macmillan . Retrieved August 3 2016 . permanent dead link a b JFKs Early Campaign 1957 The Pop History Dig . pophistorydig.com . Archived from the original on December 28 2022 . Retrieved December 28 2022 . Dallek 2003 p. 219. John F. Kennedys Pre-Presidential Voting Record Stands on Issues p. 2 of 9 . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on January 18 2024 . Retrieved March 31 2024 . Dallek 2003 p. 220. Shaw John T. October 15 2013. JFK in the Senate . St. Martins Press. p. 183. ISBN 978-0-230-34183-8 . John F. Kennedys Pre-Presidential Voting Record Stands on Issues p. 1 of 9 . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on December 5 2023 . Retrieved March 31 2024 . OBrien 2005 p. 370. OBrien 2005 pp. 370 371. OBrien 2005 p. 372. OBrien 2005 p. 374. Bryant 2006b pp. 2324. John F. Kennedy Presidential candidate and president . Encyclopedia Britannica . July 4 2023. Archived from the original on January 18 2017 . Retrieved January 16 2017 . Brinkley 2012 pp. 37. Shaw John T. October 15 2013. JFK in the Senate . St. Martins Press. p. 191. ISBN 978-0-230-34183-8 . Dallek Robert 2020. How Did We Get Here?: From Theodore Roosevelt to Donald Trump . Harper. pp. 112113. Caro Robert 2012. The Passage of Power: The Years of Lyndon Johnson . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. p. 33. Shaw John T. October 15 2013. JFK in the Senate . St. Martins Press. p. 193. ISBN 978-0-230-34183-8 . Brinkley 2012 pp. 3536. Sen. John Kennedy Formally Enters Presidential Race . Progress-Bulletin . January 2 1960. p. 1. Archived from the original on March 2 2020 via Newspapers.com . a b Brinkley 2012 pp. 3845. Hilty James 2000. Robert Kennedy: Brother Protector . Temple University Press. pp. 135136. The 1960 Democratic Presidential Race . PBS American Experience . The 1960 Democratic Presidential Race . PBS American Experience . Archived from the original on October 17 2023 . Retrieved November 21 2023 . Brinkley 2012 pp. 4547. Cosgrave Ben May 24 2014. Head to Head: JFK and RFK Los Angeles July 1960 . Time Magazine . Archived from the original on November 14 2014 . Retrieved March 19 2018 . Brinkley 2012 p. 47. John F. Kennedy: Campaigns and Elections . Miller Center . October 4 2016 . Retrieved August 17 2024 . Kennedy John F. July 15 1960. Address of Senator John F. Kennedy Accepting the Democratic Party Nomination for the Presidency of the United States . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library . Archived from the original on September 19 2016 . Retrieved August 2 2016 . Brinkley 2012 p. 49. Kennedy John F. June 18 2002. Address to the Greater Houston Ministerial Association . American Rhetoric . Archived from the original on August 2 2016 . Retrieved September 17 2007 . Casey Shaun A. 2009. The Making of a Catholic President: Kennedy vs. Nixon 1960 . New York City: Oxford University Press. Lacroix Patrick 2021. John F. Kennedy and the Politics of Faith . Lawrence: University Press of Kansas. pp. 2144. a b Campaign of 1960 . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum . Archived from the original on October 17 2023 . Retrieved October 15 2023 . a b THE KENNEDY-NIXON PRESIDENTIAL DEBATES 1960 The Museum of Broadcast Communications . The Museum of Broadcast Communications MBC. Archived from the original on August 21 2010 . Retrieved October 8 2010 . Selverstone Marc J. October 4 2016. The Campaign and Election of 1960 . University of Virginia: Miller Center . Archived from the original on April 29 2017 . Retrieved October 29 2023 . Nixon . American Experience . Season 3. Episode 2. October 15 1990. PBS . WGBH . Archived from the original on June 15 2022 . Retrieved June 15 2022 . JFK Part 1 . American Experience . Season 25. Episode 7. November 11 2013. PBS. WGBH. Archived from the original on September 25 2019 . Retrieved September 24 2019 . Bruschke John; Laura Divine March 2017. Debunking Nixons radio victory in the 1960 election: Re-analyzing the historical record and considering currently unexamined polling data . The Social Science Journal . 54 1: 6775. doi : 10.1016j.soscij.2016.09.007 . ISSN 0362-3319 . S2CID 151390817 . Archived from the original on October 22 2022 . Retrieved October 22 2022 . White Theodore H. 1961. The Making of the President 1960 . p. 294. a b Dudley Shiraev 2008 p. 83. Reeves 1993 p. 21. a b Kennedy John F. January 20 1961. Inaugural Address . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library . Archived from the original on January 11 2012 . Retrieved February 22 2012 . Kempe 2011 p. 52. Reeves 1993 p. 22. Reeves 1993 pp. 23 25. Giglio 2006 pp. 3132 35. Bobby Kennedy: Is He the Assistant President? . U.S. News World Report. February 19 1962. Archived from the original on September 15 2016 . Retrieved January 25 2024 . Herring 2008 pp. 704705. Brinkley 2012 pp. 7677. 19611968: The Presidencies of John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson . U.S. Department of State . Archived from the original on February 16 2024 . Retrieved November 19 2023 . Stephen G Rabe John F. Kennedy in Timothy J Lynch ed. The Oxford Encyclopedia of American Military and Diplomatic History 2013 1:610615. Larres Klaus; Ann Lane 2001. The Cold War: the essential readings . Wiley-Blackwell. p. 103. ISBN 978-0-631-20706-1 . Schlight John. A War Too Long: The USAF in Southeast Asia 1961-1975 PDF . U.S. Department of Defense . Archived PDF from the original on January 27 2024 . Retrieved January 27 2024 . Herring 2008 pp. 711712. Robert G. Lewis What Food Crisis?: Global Hunger and Farmers Woes. World Policy Journal 25.1 2008: 2935. online Archived January 9 2020 at the Wayback Machine Michael OBrien John F. Kennedy: A biography 2005 pp. 86768. a b John F. Kennedy and African Independence . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum . Archived from the original on November 12 2023 . Retrieved November 19 2023 . This article incorporates text from this source which is in the public domain . Giglio 2006 pp. 239242. Remarks on signing U.N. Loan Bill 2 October 1962 . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum . Archived from the original on November 19 2023 . Retrieved November 19 2023 . Dallek 2003 pp. 338339. The Peace Corps: Traveling The World To Live Work And Learn . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum . Archived from the original on January 31 2024 . Retrieved January 31 2024 . Kennedys Global Challenges . U.S. History: From Pre-Columbian to the New Millennium . Archived from the original on November 19 2023 . Retrieved November 19 2023 . Peace Corps . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum . Archived from the original on December 2 2023 . Retrieved January 27 2024 . Schlesinger 2002 pp. 606607. Meisler Stanley 2011. When the World Calls: The Inside Story of the Peace Corps and Its First Fifty Years . Beacon Press. ISBN 978-0-8070-5049-1 . Peace Corps Fast Facts . Archived from the original on August 2 2016 . Retrieved August 2 2016 . Kempe 2011 pp. 7678. Brinkley 2012 pp. 74 7778. Reeves 1993 pp. 161171. Reeves 1993 p. 175. Reeves 1993 p. 185. Reeves 1993 p. 201. Giglio 2006 pp. 8586. Kempe 2011 pp. 478479 . Updegrove Mark K. 2022. Incomparable Grace: JFK in the Presidency . Penguin Publishing Group. p. 118. Schlesinger 2002 pp. 233 238. Gleijeses 1995 . Reeves 1993 pp. 6973. 50 Years Later: Learning From The Bay Of Pigs . NPR. April 17 2011. Archived from the original on November 1 2019 . Retrieved September 1 2016 . Quesada Alejandro de 2009. The Bay of Pigs: Cuba 1961 . Elite series 166. Illustrated by Stephen Walsh. Osprey Publishing. p. 17. The Bay of Pigs . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum . Archived from the original on February 23 2021 . Retrieved November 19 2023 . This article incorporates text from this source which is in the public domain . Reeves 1993 pp. 71 673. Brinkley 2012 pp. 6869. Voss Michael April 14 2011. Bay of Pigs: The perfect failure of Cuba invasion . BBC News . Archived from the original on December 18 2023 . Retrieved November 26 2023 . The Bay of Pigs Invasion and its Aftermath April 1961October 1962 . U.S. Department of State . Archived from the original on August 23 2016 . Retrieved November 26 2023 . In Echo Park Many Local Cubans Celebrate Death Of Former President Fidel Castro . CBS News . November 26 2016. Archived from the original on November 26 2023 . Retrieved November 26 2023 . Schlesinger 2002 pp. 268294 838839. Jean Edward Smith Bay of Pigs: The Unanswered Questions The Nation April 13 1964. Reeves 1993 pp. 9597. Schlesinger 2002 pp. 290 295. Dallek 2003 pp. 370371. Hayes Matthew A. 2019. Robert Kennedy and the Cuban Missile Crisis: A Reassertion of Robert Kennedys Role as the Presidents Indispensable Partner in the Successful Resolution of the Crisis PDF . History . 104 361: 473503. doi : 10.11111468-229X.12815 . ISSN 1468-229X . S2CID 164907501 . Archived PDF from the original on December 27 2021 . Retrieved March 31 2024 . Herring 2008 pp. 707708. Reeves 1993 p. 264. a b U.S. planned massive Cuba invasion force the kidnapping of Cuban officials . USA Today . October 30 2017. Archived from the original on April 12 2019 . Retrieved April 15 2019 . 1962 US Joint Chiefs Of Staff Operation Northwoods Unclassified Document Bolsheviks NWO . Internet Archive . 1962. Giglio 2006 pp. 203205. Giglio James; Stephen G. Rabe 2003. Debating the Kennedy presidency . Rowman Littlefield. p. 39 . ISBN 978-0-7425-0834-7 . Brinkley 2012 pp. 113114. Reeves 1993 p. 345. President John F. Kennedy - Cuban Missile Crisis 1962 . National Archives . Archived from the original on September 28 2023 . Retrieved January 30 2024 . Reeves 1993 p. 245. Giglio 2006 pp. 207208. Reeves 1993 p. 387. Reeves 1993 p. 388. Reeves 1993 p. 389. Giglio 2006 p. 220. Reeves 1993 p. 390. Reeves 1993 p. 403. The World on the Brink: John F. Kennedy and the Cuban Missile Crisis . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum . Archived from the original on November 24 2023 . Retrieved November 26 2023 . Giglio 2006 pp. 225226. Reeves 1993 p. 426. Kenney 2000 pp. 184186. Herring 2008 p. 723. Kenney 2000 p. 189. Reeves 1993 p. 425. JFKs Address on the First Anniversary of the Alliance for Progress White House reception for diplomatic cors of the Latin American republics March 13 1962. Public Papers of the Presidents John F. Kennedy 1962 p. 223. Kennedy John F. John Fitzgerald 2005. John F. Kennedy: 1962 : containing the public messages speeches and statements of the president January 20 to December 31 1962 . Archived from the original on March 31 2024 . Retrieved December 29 2018 . Schlesinger 2002 pp. 788 789. Glass Andrew March 13 2019. JFK proposes an Alliance for Progress for Latin America March 13 1961 . Politico . Archived from the original on November 26 2023 . Retrieved November 26 2023 . a b Alliance for Progress . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum. Archived from the original on November 12 2023 . Retrieved November 19 2023 . This article incorporates text from this source which is in the public domain . Alliance for Progress . Encyclopdia Britannica . Archived from the original on November 18 2023 . Retrieved November 19 2023 . Alliance for Progress and Peace Corps 19611969 . United States Department of State. Archived from the original on November 18 2023 . Retrieved November 19 2023 . Reeves 1993 pp. 140142. Reeves 1993 p. 152. a b Reeves 1993 p. 75. Patterson 1996 p. 498. Dunnigan Nofi 1999 p. 257. Giglio 2006 pp. 256261. Reeves 1993 p. 281. Reeves 1993 p. 259. Dunst Charles July 20 2019. The U.S.s Toxic Agent Orange Legacy . The Atlantic. Archived from the original on October 14 2019 . Retrieved May 13 2023 . Giglio 2006 pp. 256257. 50. Interview With the President . U.S. Department of State . Archived from the original on November 12 2023 . Retrieved November 12 2023 . Interview with Walter Cronkite Inaugurating a CBS TV News Program 2 September 1963 . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum . Retrieved May 7 2024 . Reeves 1993 pp. 562563. Reeves 1993 p. 617. Giglio 2006 pp. 262268. Vietnam War . Swarthmore College Peace Collection. Archived from the original on August 3 2016. Vietnam War U.S. Military Fatal Casualty Statistics . National Archives . August 15 2016. Archived from the original on May 26 2020 . Retrieved January 30 2024 . Track the rapid escalation of the Vietnam War under Pres. John F. Kennedys administration . Encyclopedia Britannica . Archived from the original on January 30 2024 . Retrieved January 30 2024 . a b Matthews 2011 pp. 393 394. Giglio 2006 pp. 265266. Ellis Joseph J. 2000. Making Vietnam History . Reviews in American History . 28 4: 625629. doi : 10.1353rah.2000.0068 . S2CID 144881388 . Talbot David June 21 2007. Warrior For Peace . Time Magazine . Archived from the original on June 28 2007 . Retrieved March 1 2012 . Sorensen Ted 2008. Counselor: A Life at the Edge of History . New York: HarperCollins . p. 359. ISBN 978-0060798710 . Bundy McGeorge October 11 1963. National Security Action Memorandum 263 . JFK Lancer . Archived from the original on August 3 2016 . Retrieved February 19 2012 . Dallek 2003 p. 680. a b MCNAMARA-TAYLOR REPORT ON VIETNAM PDF . cia.gov Report . Retrieved May 6 2024 . Logevall Frederick 1998 Vietnam and the Question of What Might Have Been in Mark J. White ed. Kennedy: The New Frontier Revisited New York: New York University Press pp. 25 27 34-53 National Security Action Memoranda NSAM: NSAM 263 South Vietnam Report. John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum . Retrieved May 6 2024 . Reeves 1993 p. 534. Gehler Michael; Kaiser Professor of European Studies Wolfram; Kaiser Wolfram 2004. Christian Democracy in Europe Since 19455 . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-135-75385-6 . Archived from the original on July 24 2023 . Retrieved July 24 2023 . Geis Anna; Muller Harald; Schornig Niklas 2013. The Militant Face of Democracy . Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-1-107-03740-3 . Archived from the original on July 24 2023 . Retrieved July 24 2023 . Kulski W. W 1966. De Gaulle and the World . Syracuse University Press. p. 29 . de gaulle and germany european counterweight. Ninkovich Frank 1994. Modernity and Power . University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-0-226-58650-2 . Archived from the original on July 24 2023 . Retrieved July 24 2023 . Daum 2008 pp. 12563. Dallek 2003 p. 624. Daum 2008 pp. 14756. Shannon Vaughn P. 2003. Balancing Act: US Foreign Policy and the Arab-Israeli Conflict . Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing. p. 55. ISBN 0754635910 . Zachary K. Goldman Ties that bind: John F. Kennedy and the foundations of the AmericanIsraeli alliance: The Cold War and Israel. Cold War History 9.1 2009: 2358 quoting Ben-Zvi on p 25. Little Douglas. American Orientalism: The United States and the Middle East Since 1945 . The University of North Carolina Press . p. 62. Gibson 2015 pp. 4345. Gibson 2015 pp. 45 5758. Gibson 2015 pp. 6061 80. President John F. Kennedy on His Historic Trip to Ireland . Shapell Manuscript Collection . Shapell Manuscript Foundation. Archived from the original on May 17 2020 . Retrieved November 13 2013 . Sorensen 1966 p. 656. a b Timeline . JFKhomecoming . 2013. Archived from the original on November 11 2023 . Retrieved March 31 2024 . 1963: Warm welcome for JFK in Ireland . BBC News . June 27 1963. Archived from the original on August 3 2016 . Retrieved February 23 2012 . Address Before the Irish Parliament in Dublin June 28 1963 Text and audio . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum . June 28 1963. Archived from the original on August 28 2018 . Retrieved July 3 2013 . President Kennedy in Ireland Text and video . RTE Archives . Archived from the original on September 20 2023 . Retrieved July 3 2013 . Ryan Ray June 21 2013. The best four days of JFKs life . Irish Examiner . Cork. ISSN 1393-9564 . Archived from the original on January 27 2022 . Retrieved February 6 2022 . Mufson Steve August 4 2015. Obama will echo Kennedys American University nuclear speech from 1963 . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on August 5 2015 . Retrieved August 6 2015 . Wang Joy Y. August 4 2015. Obama to follow in John F. Kennedys historic footsteps . MSNBC. Archived from the original on August 3 2016 . Retrieved August 6 2015 . Reeves 1993 p. 514. Reeves 1993 p. 552. Reeves 1993 p. 227. Reeves 1993 p. 229. a b Reeves 1993 p. 243. Reeves 1993 p. 542. Reeves 1993 p. 548. Nuclear Test Ban Treaty . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum . Archived from the original on July 19 2019 . Retrieved November 19 2023 . This article incorporates text from this source which is in the public domain . Reeves 1993 p. 550. Brinkley 2012 pp. 6365. Giglio 2006 pp. 4041 100. Giglio 2006 p. 99. Giglio 2006 pp. 102103. a b Giglio 2006 pp. 105106. Giglio 2006 pp. 103104. Giglio 2006 pp. 104105. Giglio 2006 pp. 106107. John F. Kennedy and People with Intellectual Disabilities . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum . Archived from the original on January 21 2022 . Retrieved November 19 2023 . This article incorporates text from this source which is in the public domain . Giglio 2006 pp. 107109. Rehm John B. April 1968. Developments in the law and institutions of international economic relations: the Kennedy Round of Trade Negotiations . The American Journal of International Law . 62 2. American Society of International Law : 403434. doi : 10.23072196880 . JSTOR 2196880 . Patterson 1996 pp. 464465. Giglio 2006 p. 125. Giglio 2006 pp. 136137. Giglio 2006 pp. 139141. Ippolito Dennis 2004. Why Budgets Matter: Budget Policy and American Politics . Penn State Press. pp. 173175. ISBN 0-271-02260-4 . Frum 2000 p. 293. Frum 2000 p. 324. a b c BEA: Quarterly GDP figures by sector 19531964 . United States Department of Commerce Bureau of Economic Analysis. Archived from the original on March 6 2012 . Retrieved February 23 2012 . Consumer and Gross Domestic Price Indices: 1913 to 2002 PDF . U.S. Census Bureau. 2003. Archived from the original PDF on May 11 2005 . Retrieved February 23 2012 . Statistical Abstract of the United States 1964 PDF . U.S. Department of Commerce. July 1964. Archived PDF from the original on May 17 2020 . Retrieved March 28 2010 . Parmet 1983 p. 238. Giglio 2006 pp. 130134. Inflation in Steel . The New York Times . April 12 1962. Archived from the original on March 31 2024 . Retrieved February 24 2012 . Reeves 1993 p. 300. Reeves 1993 pp. 318320. Dallek 2003 pp. 292293. Brauer 2002 p. 487. The Kennedys and the Civil Rights Movement . National Park Service . Archived from the original on June 24 2023 . Retrieved November 19 2023 . a b c d e f Brauer 2002 p. 490. Bryant 2006a pp. 60 66. Reeves 1993 p. 126. The Modern Civil Rights Movement and The Kennedy Administration . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum . Archived from the original on December 14 2018 . Retrieved November 19 2023 . This article incorporates text from this source which is in the public domain . Hilty James 2000. Robert Kennedy: Brother Protector . Temple University Press. p. 329. wikisource Executive Order No. 10925 Patterson 1996 pp. 473475. U.S. Marshals Mark 50th Anniversary of the Integration of Ole Miss . www.usmarshals.gov . Archived from the original on May 23 2020 . Retrieved April 25 2020 . Bryant 2006a p. 71. Dallek 2003 p. 580. Reeves 1993 pp. 521523. Kennedy John F. Civil Rights Address . AmericanRhetoric.com . Archived from the original on May 13 2011 . Retrieved September 20 2007 . Schlesinger 2002 p. 966. Reeves 1993 p. 524. Cohen 2016 p. 357. Goduti 2012 p. 206. Garrow David J. The FBI and Martin Luther King . The Atlantic . Archived from the original on April 25 2017 . Retrieved April 25 2017 . Federal Bureau of Investigation FBI . Stanford University. May 2 2017. Archived from the original on April 15 2020 . Retrieved December 3 2019 . Herst 2007 p. 372. Herst 2007 pp. 372374. a b Reeves 1993 pp. 580584. Reeves 1993 pp. 599600. Reeves 1993 pp. 628631. a b Brauer 2002 p. 492. Giglio 2006 p. 142. Kennedy John F. December 14 1961. Executive Order 10980Establishing the Presidents Commission on the Status of Women . Online by Gerhard Peters and John T. Woolley The American Presidency Project. Archived from the original on May 11 2011 . Retrieved January 25 2011 . Reeves 1993 p. 433. The Equal Pay Act Turns 40 . Archive.eeoc.gov. Archived from the original on June 26 2012. Schwartz David September 2010. Not Undertaking the Almost-Impossible Task: The 1961 Wire Acts Development Initial Applications and Ultimate Purpose . Gaming Law Review and Economics . 14 7: 533540. doi : 10.1089glre.2010.14708 . Archived from the original on October 1 2023 . Retrieved November 19 2023 . Rothchild John A. 2016. Research Handbook on Electronic Commerce Law . Edward Elgar Publishing Limited. p. 453. ISBN 9781783479924 . Archived from the original on November 18 2023 . Retrieved November 19 2023 . Legislative Summary: District of Columbia . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library . Archived from the original on May 29 2015 . Retrieved June 8 2015 . Norton Letter to U.S. Attorney Says Death Penalty Trial That Begins Today Part of Troubling and Futile Pattern . Office of Congresswoman Eleanor Holmes Norton . January 8 2007. Archived from the original on March 3 2012 . Retrieved February 23 2012 . Giglio 2006 pp. 109118. Bilharz 2002 p. 55. Kennedy John F. August 11 1961. 320Letter to the President of the Seneca Nation of Indians Concerning the Kinzua Dam on the Allegheny River . The American Presidency Project. Archived from the original on January 12 2012 . Retrieved February 25 2012 . Giglio 2006 pp. 150151. Murray Charles; Cox Catherine Bly 1989. Apollo: The Race to the Moon . Simon Schuster. p. 60. ISBN 0671611011 . Reeves 1993 p. 138. Giglio 2006 pp. 151152. Dallek 2003 p. 502. Dallek 2003 p. 393. a b Giglio 2006 pp. 152153. Space Program . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum . Archived from the original on November 21 2023 . Retrieved November 21 2023 . Kennedy John F. 1961. Apollo Expeditions to the Moon: Chapter 2 . history.nasa.gov . Archived from the original on July 14 2019 . Retrieved February 26 2012 . Young Hugo; Silcock Bryan; Dunn Peter M. 1969. Journey to Tranquility . London: Jonathon Cape. pp. 109112 Kennedy John F. September 12 1962. President John F. Kennedy: The Space Effort . Rice University . Archived from the original on July 8 2006. Selverstone Marc 2011. JFK and the Space Race . White House TapesPresidential Recordings Program Miller Center of Public Affairs University of Virginia. Archived from the original on March 5 2012 . Retrieved February 26 2012 . Giglio 2006 pp. 153155. Supreme Court Nominations 1789-Present . Washington D.C.: United States Senate. Archived from the original on October 7 2019 . Retrieved February 16 2022 . Kennedy Nominees Still Serving Country PDF . Federal Bar Association . Archived PDF from the original on December 13 2023 . Retrieved December 13 2023 . Wicker Tom November 23 1963. Kennedy Is Killed By Sniper As He Rides In Car In Dallas; Johnson Sworn In On Plane . The New York Times . Why was U.S. Pres. John F. Kennedy in Texas on November 22 1963? . Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved August 17 2024 . Doctors attending to Kennedy reported . November 1963. Archived from the original on May 28 2018 . Retrieved May 15 2018 . Dallek 2003 p. 694. November 22 1963: Death of the President . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on February 28 2012 . Retrieved July 25 2021 . Lee Harvey Oswald . Encyclopedia Britannica . July 29 2024. Lee Oswald claiming innocence film Archived March 26 2014 at the Wayback Machine YouTube Warren Commission Hearings vol. 20 p. 366 Kantor Exhibit No. 3Handwritten notes made by Seth Kantor concerning events surrounding the assassination Archived March 28 2019 at the Wayback Machine November 22 1963: Death of the President . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on February 28 2012 . Retrieved July 25 2021 . Jack Ruby . Encyclopedia Britannica . Brauer 2002 p. 497. Dallek 2003 p. 698. Gus Russo and Stephen Molton Archived November 19 2018 at the Wayback Machine Did Castro OK the Kennedy Assassination? American Heritage Winter 2009. Majority in U.S. Still Believe JFK Killed in a Conspiracy: Mafia federal government top list of potential conspirators . Gallup Inc. November 15 2013. Archived from the original on August 1 2016. Report of the Select Committee on Assassinations of the U.S. House of Representatives Archived April 3 2020 at the Wayback Machine . U.S. House of Representatives. Retrieved November 11 2013. Council National Research 1982. Report of the Committee on Ballistic Acoustics . doi : 10.1722610264 . ISBN 978-0-309-25372-7 . Archived from the original on March 14 2022 . Retrieved January 11 2022 . PDF Justice Department of JFK-King Reinvestigation PDF . The Harold Weisberg Archive . p. 5. Archived PDF from the original on November 9 2021 . Retrieved January 17 2022 . Associated Press 1963 pp. 3637 5657 68 The New York Times 2003 pp. 197201 a b White 1965 p. 16 NBC News 1966 pp. 106107 110 114115 119123 133134 a b White 1965 p. 17 Associated Press 1963 p. 93 NBC News 1966 p. 126 White 1965 p. 18 a b Reeves 1993 p. 29. The Kennedys in Politics . PBS American Experience . Retrieved October 7 2024 . Robert F. Kennedy Jr. files paperwork to run for president as a Democrat . CNN . April 5 2023. Archived from the original on April 5 2023 . Retrieved May 2 2023 . Kelly Garrity April 5 2023. Robert F. Kennedy Jr. running for president in 2024 . Politico . Archived from the original on April 5 2023 . Retrieved April 5 2023 . Statement of Candidacy . docquery.fec.gov . April 5 2023. Archived from the original on April 5 2023 . Retrieved April 5 2023 . Robert F. Kennedy Jr. files paperwork to run for president as a Democrat . CBS . April 5 2023. Archived from the original on April 7 2023 . Retrieved May 2 2023 . Cover story Time magazine January 20 1961 Wedding of Jacqueline Bouvier and John F. Kennedy . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum . Retrieved February 6 2016 . Specious allegations in 1997 by UK journalist Terry OHanlon Golden Andrew July 27 1997. JFK The Bigamist. ... . The Truth At Last; Kennedy was already married when he got wed to Jackie. ... . Sunday Mirror . Archived from the original on September 6 2023 . Retrieved October 31 2010 . and by author Seymour Hersh Reingold Joyce March 26 2008. JFK Secret Marriage A Story With Legs . Palm Beach Daily News . Archived from the original on May 10 2011 . Retrieved October 31 2010 . that Kennedy had married previously have been soundly disproven. Reeves states that Ben Bradlee then at Newsweek inspected FBI files on it and confirmed the falsehood. Reeves 1993 p. 348; for further refutation see OBrien 2005 p. 706. Smith Sally Bedell 2004. Grace and Power: The Private World of the Kennedy White House . Random House. ISBN 978-0-375-50449-5 . OBrien p. 291. Brinkley 2012 pp. 36. Logevall Fredrik 2020. JFK: Coming of Age in the American Century 1917-1956 . Random House. pp. 443444. Shaw John T. October 15 2013. JFK in the Senate . St. Martins Press. p. 15. ISBN 978-0-230-34183-8 . OBrien p. 292. Kennedy Plane Found to Be Fully Functional . The Washington Post . July 31 1999. Archived from the original on May 25 2010 . Retrieved January 2 2010 . Blair William M. August 10 1963. Kennedys Mourn Death of Infant Kennedys Mourning Baby Son; Funeral Today Will Be Private . The New York Times . p. 1. Archived from the original on October 20 2023 . Retrieved December 13 2023 . Rouse Robert March 15 2006. Happy Anniversary to the first scheduled presidential press conference93 years young! . American Chronicle. Archived from the original on September 13 2008. RTDNAs Kennedy connections . Radio Television Digital News Association November 26 2013. Archived from the original on August 19 2017 . Retrieved May 27 2014 . Life of Jacqueline B. Kennedy . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum . Archived from the original on December 18 2023 . Retrieved December 13 2023 . The White House Restoration . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum . Archived from the original on December 13 2023 . Retrieved December 13 2023 . The First Family 1962 PDF . Library of Congress . Archived PDF from the original on January 17 2024 . Retrieved December 20 2023 . Dallek 2003 p. 32. a b c Dallek Robert December 2002. The Medical Ordeals of JFK . The Atlantic . Archived from the original on August 1 2016 . Retrieved March 29 2015 . Matthews 2011 p. 15. Dallek 2003 p. 42. JFK Part 1 . American Experience . Season 25. Episode 7. November 11 2013. PBS . WGBH . Archived from the original on September 25 2019 . Retrieved September 24 2019 . Mandel Lee R. 2009. Endocrine and Autoimmune Aspects of the Health History of John F. Kennedy . Annals of Internal Medicine . 151 5: 350354. doi : 10.73260003-4819-151-5-200909010-00011 . PMID 19721023 . Kempe 2011 p. 213. New York Sun September 20 2005: Dr. Feelgood Archived April 10 2019 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved July 11 2011 Reeves 1993 pp. 42 158159. Reeves 1993 p. 244. Online NewsHour with Senior Correspondent Ray Suarez and physician Jeffrey Kelman Pres. Kennedys Health Secrets The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer transcript November 18 2002 Ghaemi M.D. M.P.H. Nassir September 14 2011. What Jackie Kennedy Didnt Sayand Didnt Know . Psychology Today . Archived from the original on March 31 2024 . Retrieved August 22 2016 . Dallek 2003 pp. 8385. Osborne 2006 p. 195. Kole William J. May 5 2021. JFK love letters to Swedish mistress to be sold at auction . The Atlanta Journal-Constitution . Archived from the original on May 7 2021 . Retrieved May 8 2021 . Reeves 1993 pp. 315316. Reeves 1993 p. 289. Dallek 2003 p. 475. Garrow David J. May 28 2003. Substance Over Sex In Kennedy Biography . The New York Times . Archived from the original on January 3 2013 . Retrieved January 20 2013 . Dallek 2003 pp. 475 476. Kimble Lindsay March 18 2024. Meet JFKs Alleged Mistresses and How Some Met Mysterious Ends . Peoplemag . Retrieved August 26 2024 . Leaming 2006 pp. 379380. Dallek 2003 p. 581. Dallek 2003 p. 376. Booknotes interview with historian Michael Beschloss on The Crisis Years: Kennedy and Khrushchev Archived November 2 2021 at the Wayback Machine C-SPAN: June 21 1991 Taylor Branch Kennedys and Hoover: How Their Battles Affected King Archived November 2 2021 at the Wayback Machine Los Angeles Times December 18 1988 Larry Sabato John F. Kennedys Final Days Reveal A Man Who Craved Excitement Archived November 2 2021 at the Wayback Machine Forbes October 16 2013 Barnes 2007 p. 116. Reeves 1993 p. 291. Dallek 2003 p. 478. a b Shaping Up America: JFK Sports and the Call to Physical Fitness . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum . Archived from the original on February 13 2024 . Retrieved March 19 2024 . Prince DeAntae January 20 2017. Satch Sanders QA: The NBA And the White House . Sports Illustrated . Archived from the original on March 19 2024 . Retrieved March 19 2024 . Summertime Sailing . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum . Archived from the original on March 19 2024 . Retrieved March 19 2024 . Buccellato Robert 2021. Images of America: Presidential Vacations in Florida . Arcadia Publishing. p. 98. Life of John F. Kennedy . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum . Archived from the original on March 21 2024 . Retrieved March 21 2024 . Saint Aidans Church . National Park Service . Archived from the original on March 21 2024 . Retrieved March 20 2024 . Giglio 2006 pp. 308309. Rottinghaus Brandon; Vaughn Justin February 16 2015. New ranking of U.S. presidents puts Lincoln at No. 1 Obama at 18; Kennedy judged most overrated . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on December 19 2019 . Retrieved April 28 2017 . Presidential Historians Survey 2017 . C-SPAN. 2017. Archived from the original on April 27 2017 . Retrieved April 28 2017 . Jones Jeffrey M. July 17 2023. Retrospective Approval of JFK Rises to 90; Trump at 46 . Gallup Inc. Archived from the original on January 7 2024 . Retrieved January 7 2024 . John F. Kennedy: Impact and Legacy . Miller Center of Public Affairs University of Virginia. October 4 2016. Archived from the original on March 18 2017 . Retrieved April 28 2017 . Brinkley Alan. The Legacy of John F. Kennedy . The Atlantic . Archived from the original on August 29 2016 . Retrieved September 1 2016 . Gillman Todd J. November 16 2013. JFKs legacy: Kennedy fell short of greatness yet inspired a generation . Dallas Morning News . Retrieved April 28 2017 . permanent dead link The Gallup Poll 1999 . Wilmington DE: Scholarly Resources Inc. 1999. pp. 248249 . Greatest of the Century . GallupCNNUSA Today Poll. December 2021 1999. Archived from the original on January 5 2007 . Retrieved January 5 2007 . Recipients . The Laetare Medal . University of Notre Dame. Archived from the original on February 4 2021 . Retrieved July 31 2020 . Wetterau Bruce 1996. The Presidential Medal of Freedom : winners and their achievements . Washington D.C.: Congressional Quarterly Inc. p. 58 . ISBN 1-56802-128-3 . Retrieved September 9 2019 . Linda Czuba Brigance For One Brief Shining Moment: Choosing to Remember Camelot. Studies in Popular Culture 25.3 2003: 1-12 online Archived September 6 2023 at the Wayback Machine Richard Dean Burns and Joseph M. Siracusa Historical Dictionary of the Kennedy-Johnson Era Rowman Littlefield 2015 pp. 7576. The Personal Papers of Theodore H. White 19151986: Series 11. Camelot Documents John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Museum quotation: The 1963 LIFE article represented the first use of the term Camelot in print and is attributed with having played a major role in establishing and fixing this image of the Kennedy Administration and period in the popular mind. An Epilogue in LIFE December 6 1963 pp.1589 Richard Dean Burns and Joseph M. Siracusa Historical Dictionary of the Kennedy-Johnson Era Rowman Littlefield 2015 pp. 75-76. Jon Goodman et al. The Kennedy Mystique: Creating Camelot National Geographic Books 2006. Works cited Ballard Robert D. 2002. Collision With History: The Search for John F. Kennedys PT 109 . Washington D.C.: National Geographic. ISBN 978-0-7922-6876-5 . Barnes John 2007. John F. Kennedy on Leadership . New York: AMACOM. ISBN 978-0-8144-7455-6 . Bilharz Joy Ann 2002 1998. The Allegany Senecas and Kinzua Dam: Forced Relocation Through Two Generations . Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. ISBN 978-0-8032-1282-4 . Blight James G.; Lang Janet M. 2005. The Fog of War: Eleven Lessons from the Life of Robert S. McNamara . Lanham MD: Rowman Littlefield. ISBN 978-0-7425-4221-1 . Brauer Carl M. 2002. John F. Kennedy . In Graff Henry ed.. The Presidents: A Reference History 2nd ed.. Macmillan Library Reference USA. pp. 481498. ISBN 0-684-80551-0 . Brinkley Alan 2012. John F. Kennedy . New York: Times Books. ISBN 978-0-8050-8349-1 . Bryant Nick Autumn 2006a. Black Man Who Was Crazy Enough to Apply to Ole Miss . The Journal of Blacks in Higher Education 53: 31 6071. JSTOR 25073538 . Archived from the original on February 10 2023 . Retrieved March 31 2024 via JSTOR. Bryant Nick 2006b. The Bystander: John F. Kennedy and the Struggle for Black Equality . Basic Books. Cohen Andrew 2016 2014. Two Days in June: John F. Kennedy and the 48 Hours That Changed History illustrated reprint ed.. Toronto: McClelland Stewart. ISBN 978-0-7710-2389-7 . Archived from the original on March 31 2024 . Retrieved July 24 2023 . Dallek Robert 2003. An Unfinished Life: John F. Kennedy 19171963 . Boston: Little Brown and Co. ISBN 978-0-316-17238-7 . Daum Andreas 2008. Kennedy in Berlin . New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-0-521-85824-3 . Donovan Robert J. 2001 1961. PT-109: John F. Kennedy in WW II 40th Anniversary ed.. New York: McGraw Hill. ISBN 978-0-07-137643-3 . Doyle William 2015. PT-109: An American Epic of War Survival and the Destiny of John F. Kennedy . New York: Harper-Collins. ISBN 978-0-06-234658-2 . Dudley Robert L.; Shiraev Eric 2008. Counting Every Vote: The Most Contentious Elections in American History . Dulles VA: Potomac Books. ISBN 978-1-59797-224-6 . Dunnigan James ; Nofi Albert 1999. Dirty Little Secrets of the Vietnam War . New York: St. Martins. ISBN 978-0-312-19857-2 . Frum David 2000. How We Got Here: The 70s . New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-04196-1 . Gibson Bryan R. 2015. Sold Out? US Foreign Policy Iraq the Kurds and the Cold War . New York: Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-137-48711-7 . Giglio James N. 2006. The Presidency of John F. Kennedy 2nd ed.. University Press of Kansas. Gleijeses Piero February 1995. Ships in the Night: The CIA the White House and the Bay of Pigs . Journal of Latin American Studies . 27 1: 142. doi : 10.1017S0022216X00010154 . ISSN 0022-216X . S2CID 146390097 . Goduti Philip A. Jr. 2012. Robert F. Kennedy and the Shaping of Civil Rights 19601964 . Jefferson NC: McFarland. ISBN 978-0-7864-4943-9 . Herring George C. 2008. From Colony to Superpower; U.S. Foreign Relations Since 1776 . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-507822-0 . Herst Burton 2007. Bobby and J. Edgar: The Historic Face-Off Between the Kennedys and J. Edgar Hoover That Transformed America . New York: Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-7867-1982-2 . Kempe Frederick 2011. Berlin 1961 . New York: G.P. Putnams Sons. ISBN 978-0-399-15729-5 . Kenney Charles 2000. John F. Kennedy: The Presidential Portfolio . New York: PublicAffairs. ISBN 978-1-891620-36-2 . Leaming Barbara 2006. Jack Kennedy: The Education of a Statesman . New York: W. W. Norton. ISBN 978-0-393051-61-2 . Matthews Chris 2011. Jack Kennedy: Elusive Hero . New York: Simon Schuster. ISBN 978-1-4516-3508-9 . OBrien Michael 2005. John F. Kennedy: A Biography . New York: Thomas Dunne. ISBN 978-0-312-28129-8 . Osborne Robert 2006. Leading Ladies: The 50 Most Unforgettable Actresses of the Studio Era . San Francisco: Chronicle Books. ISBN 978-0-8118-5248-7 . Parmet Herbert S. 1983. JFK: The Presidency of John F. Kennedy . New York: Dial Press. ISBN 978-0-140-07054-5 . Patterson James 1996. Grand Expectations: The United States 19451974 . Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0195117974 . Reeves Richard 1993. President Kennedy: Profile of Power . New York: Simon Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-64879-4 . Schlesinger Arthur M. Jr. 2002 1965. A Thousand Days: John F. Kennedy in the White House . Boston: Houghton Mifflin. ISBN 978-0-618-21927-8 . Sorensen Theodore 1966 1965. Kennedy paperback. New York: Bantam. OCLC 2746832 . Walton Hanes Jr.; Smith Robert C. 2000. American Politics and the African American Quest for Universal Freedom . New York: Addison Wesley Longman. ISBN 978-0-321-07038-8 . The Torch is Passed: The Associated Press Story of the Death of a President . New York: Associated Press. 1963. ISBN 978-0861015689 . NBC News 1966. There Was a President . New York: Random House. White Theodore Harold 1965. The Making of the President 1964 . New York: Atheneum. The New York Times 2003. Semple Robert B. Jr. ed.. Four days in November . New York: St. Martins Press. Further reading Main article: Bibliography of John F. Kennedy External links John F. Kennedy at Wikipedias sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum John Fitzgerald Kennedy National Historic Site Appearances on C-SPAN John F. Kennedy: A Resource Guide the Library of Congress Extensive Essays on JFK with shorter essays on his cabinet and First Lady Miller Center of Public Affairs Kennedy Administration from Office of the Historian United States Government Printing Office Works by or about John F. Kennedy at the Internet Archive Works by John F. Kennedy at LibriVox public domain audiobooks John F. Kennedy at Curlie Works by John F. Kennedy at Project Gutenberg Kennedy Convocation Collection at the Amherst College Archives Special Collections documenting one of his last visits before his assassination United States Congress. John F. Kennedy id: K000107 . Biographical Directory of the United States Congress . v t e John F. Kennedy 35th President of the United States 19611963 U.S. Senator from Massachusetts 19531960 U.S. Representative for MA11 19471953 Presidency timeline Transition Inauguration Cabinet Judicial appointments Supreme Court Executive Orders Presidential Proclamations Presidential pardons Presidential limousine Presidential yacht Resolute desk Situation Room Foreign policy Alliance for Progress Arms Control and Disarmament Agency Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Flexible response Kennedy Doctrine Peace Corps Trade Expansion Act Migration and Refugee Assistance Act USAID Vietnam War Cuba: Bay of Pigs Invasion Cuban Project Cuban Missile Crisis ExComm Soviet Union: Berlin Crisis MoscowWashington hotline Vienna summit New Frontier Communications Satellite Act Community Mental Health Act Equal Pay Act Executive Order 11110 Federal affirmative action Federal housing segregation ban Fifty-mile hikes Food for Peace Pilot Food Stamp Program Presidential Medal of Freedom Space policy Status of Women Presidential Commission University of Alabama integration Voter Education Project All-Channel Receiver Act Oil Pollution Act of 1961 Revenue Act of 1962 Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act of 1961 Wetlands Loan Act Presidential speeches Inaugural address American University speech We choose to go to the Moon Report to the American People on Civil Rights Ich bin ein Berliner A rising tide lifts all boats Remarks at Amherst College on the Arts State of the Union Address 1961 1962 1963 Elections U.S. House of Representatives elections: 1946 1948 1950 U.S. Senate elections in Massachusetts: 1952 1958 1960 presidential primaries 1960 presidential campaign Democratic National Conventions: 1956 1960 U.S. presidential election 1960 debates Personal life Birthplace and childhood home Kennedy Compound Hickory Hill La Querida Wexford Navy service: PT-109 Biuku Gasa and Eroni Kumana Arthur Evans PT-59 Castle Hot Springs Hammersmith Farm Coretta Scott King phone call Happy Birthday Mr. President John F. Kennedy document hoax Books Why England Slept 1940 Profiles in Courage 1956 A Nation of Immigrants 1958 Death Assassination timeline media coverage reactions in popular culture State funeral Riderless horse attending dignitaries Gravesite and Eternal Flame Legacy Bibliography John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum Profile in Courage Award Twenty-fourth Amendment Civil Rights Act of 1964 Apollo 11 Moon landing Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Kennedy Space Center Kennedy Round U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development VISTA Cultural depictions films Kennedy half dollar U.S. postage stamps U.S. five cent stamp LincolnKennedy coincidences Operation Sail Memorials namesakes Harvard Kennedy School Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts John F. Kennedy Federal Building Boston John F. Kennedy International Airport Boston statue Brooklyn memorial Dallas memorial Hyannis memorial London memorial Portland memorial Runnymede memorial John F. Kennedy Arboretum John F. Kennedy Memorial Bridge John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School John F. Kennedy University defunct John F. Kennedy Stadium Kennedy Expressway Mount Kennedy MV John F. Kennedy USS John F. Kennedy CV-67 USS John F. Kennedy CVN-79 Yad Kennedy Family Jacqueline Bouvier wife Caroline Kennedy daughter John F. Kennedy Jr. son Patrick Bouvier Kennedy son Rose Schlossberg granddaughter Tatiana Schlossberg granddaughter Jack Schlossberg grandson Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. father Rose Fitzgerald mother Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. brother Rosemary Kennedy sister Kathleen Cavendish Marchioness of Hartington sister Eunice Kennedy Shriver sister Patricia Kennedy Lawford sister Robert F. Kennedy brother Jean Kennedy Smith sister Ted Kennedy brother P. J. Kennedy grandfather John F. Fitzgerald grandfather Pushinka dog Billie and Debbie hamsters Dwight D. Eisenhower Lyndon B. Johnson Category Offices and distinctions U.S. House of Representatives Preceded by James Michael Curley Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Massachusettss 11th congressional district 19471953 Succeeded by Tip ONeill Party political offices Preceded by David I. Walsh Democratic nominee for U.S. Senator from Massachusetts Class 1 1952 1958 Succeeded by Ted Kennedy Preceded by Adlai Stevenson II Democratic nominee for President of the United States 1960 Succeeded by Lyndon B. Johnson U.S. Senate Preceded by Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. United States Senator Class 1 from Massachusetts 19531960 Served alongside: Leverett Saltonstall Succeeded by Benjamin A. Smith II Political offices Preceded by Dwight D. Eisenhower President of the United States 19611963 Succeeded by Lyndon B. Johnson Honorary titles Preceded by Unknown Soldiers of World War II and the Korean War Persons who have lain in state or honor in the United States Capitol rotunda 1963 Succeeded by Douglas MacArthur Links to related articles v t e Presidents of the United States Presidents and presidencies George Washington 17891797 John Adams 17971801 Thomas Jefferson 18011809 James Madison 18091817 James Monroe 18171825 John Quincy Adams 18251829 Andrew Jackson 18291837 Martin Van Buren 18371841 William Henry Harrison 1841 John Tyler 18411845 James K. Polk 18451849 Zachary Taylor 18491850 Millard Fillmore 18501853 Franklin Pierce 18531857 James Buchanan 18571861 Abraham Lincoln 18611865 Andrew Johnson 18651869 Ulysses S. Grant 18691877 Rutherford B. Hayes 18771881 James A. Garfield 1881 Chester A. Arthur 18811885 Grover Cleveland 18851889 Benjamin Harrison 18891893 Grover Cleveland 18931897 William McKinley 18971901 Theodore Roosevelt 19011909 William Howard Taft 19091913 Woodrow Wilson 19131921 Warren G. Harding 19211923 Calvin Coolidge 19231929 Herbert Hoover 19291933 Franklin D. Roosevelt 19331945 Harry S. Truman 19451953 Dwight D. Eisenhower 19531961 John F. Kennedy 19611963 Lyndon B. Johnson 19631969 Richard Nixon 19691974 Gerald Ford 19741977 Jimmy Carter 19771981 Ronald Reagan 19811989 George H. W. Bush 19891993 Bill Clinton 19932001 George W. Bush 20012009 Barack Obama 20092017 Donald Trump 20172021 Joe Biden 2021present Presidency timelines Washington McKinley T. Roosevelt Taft Wilson Harding Coolidge Hoover F. D. Roosevelt Truman Eisenhower Kennedy L. B. Johnson Nixon Ford Carter Reagan G. H. W. Bush Clinton G. W. Bush Obama Trump Biden Category List v t e Democratic Party History Second Party System Third Party System Fourth Party System Fifth Party System Sixth Party System National conventions presidential tickets and presidential primaries 1828 None : Jackson Calhoun 1832 Baltimore : Jackson Van Buren 1835 Baltimore : Van Buren R. Johnson 1840 Baltimore : Van Buren None 1844 Baltimore : Polk Dallas 1848 Baltimore : Cass Butler 1852 Baltimore : Pierce King 1856 Cincinnati : Buchanan Breckinridge 1860 CharlestonBaltimore : Douglas H. Johnson Breckinridge Lane SD 1864 Chicago : McClellan Pendleton 1868 New York : Seymour Blair 1872 Baltimore : Greeley Brown 1876 Saint Louis : Tilden Hendricks 1880 Cincinnati : Hancock English 1884 Chicago : Cleveland Hendricks 1888 Saint Louis : Cleveland Thurman 1892 Chicago : Cleveland Stevenson I 1896 Chicago : W. Bryan Sewall 1900 Kansas City : W. Bryan Stevenson I 1904 Saint Louis : Parker H. Davis 1908 Denver : W. Bryan Kern 1912 Baltimore : Wilson Marshall primaries 1916 Saint Louis : Wilson Marshall primaries 1920 San Francisco : Cox Roosevelt primaries 1924 New York : J. Davis C. Bryan primaries 1928 Houston : Smith Robinson primaries 1932 Chicago : Roosevelt Garner primaries 1936 Philadelphia : Roosevelt Garner primaries 1940 Chicago : Roosevelt Wallace primaries 1944 Chicago : Roosevelt Truman primaries 1948 Philadelphia : Truman Barkley primaries 1952 Chicago : Stevenson II Sparkman primaries 1956 Chicago : Stevenson II Kefauver primaries 1960 Los Angeles : Kennedy L. Johnson primaries 1964 Atlantic City : L. Johnson Humphrey primaries 1968 Chicago : Humphrey Muskie primaries 1972 Miami Beach : McGovern Eagleton Shriver primaries 1976 New York : Carter Mondale primaries 1980 New York : Carter Mondale primaries 1984 San Francisco : Mondale Ferraro primaries 1988 Atlanta : Dukakis Bentsen primaries 1992 New York : B. Clinton Gore primaries 1996 Chicago : B. Clinton Gore primaries 2000 Los Angeles : Gore Lieberman primaries 2004 Boston : Kerry Edwards primaries 2008 Denver : Obama Biden primaries 2012 Charlotte : Obama Biden primaries 2016 Philadelphia : H. Clinton Kaine primaries 2020 Milwaukeeother locations : Biden Harris primaries 2024 Chicago : Harris Walz primaries Presidential administrations Jackson 18291837 Van Buren 18371841 Polk 18451849 Pierce 18531857 Buchanan 18571861 A. Johnson 18681869 Cleveland 18851889; 18931897 Wilson 19131921 Roosevelt 19331941 ; 19411945 Truman 19451953 Kennedy 19611963 L. B. Johnson 19631969 Carter 19771981 Clinton 19932001 Obama 20092017 Biden 2021 U.S. House leaders Speakers and Caucus chairs A. Stevenson 18271834 Bell 18341835 Polk 18351839 J. W. Jones 18431845 Davis 18451847 Cobb 18491851 Boyd 18511855 G. W. Jones 18551857 Orr 18571859 Houston 18591861 Niblack Randall 18691871 Niblack 18731875 Kerr 18751876 Randall 18761881 Carlisle 18831889 Holman 18891891 Crisp 18911895 D. B. Culberson 18951897 Richardson 18971903 Williams 19031909 Clark 19091921 Kitchin 19211923 Garrett 19231929 Garner 19291933 Rainey 19331934 Byrns 19351936 Bankhead 19361940 Rayburn 19401961 McCormack 19621971 Albert 19711977 ONeill 19771987 Wright 19871989 Foley 19891995 Gephardt 19952003 Pelosi 20032023 Jeffries 2023 U.S. Senate leaders and Caucus chairs J. W. Stevenson 18731877 Wallace 18771881 Pendleton 18811885 Beck 18851890 Gorman 18901898 Turpie 18981899 J. K. Jones 18991903 Gorman 19031906 Blackburn 19061907 C. A. Culberson 19071909 Money 19091911 Martin 19111913 Kern 19131917 Martin 19171919 Hitchcock 19191920 Underwood 19201923 Robinson 19231937 Barkley 19371949 Lucas 19491951 McFarland 19511953 Johnson 19531961 Mansfield 19611977 Byrd 19771989 Mitchell 19891995 Daschle 19952005 Reid 20052017 Schumer 2017 Chairs of the DNC Hallett McLane Smalley Belmont Schell Hewitt Barnum Brice Harrity Jones Taggart Mack McCombs McCormick Cummings White Hull Shaver Raskob Farley Flynn Walker Hannegan McGrath Boyle McKinney Mitchell Butler Jackson Bailey OBrien Harris OBrien Westwood Strauss Curtis White Manatt Kirk Brown Wilhelm DeLee Dodd Fowler Romer Grossman Rendell Andrew McAuliffe Dean Kaine Wasserman Schultz Perez Harrison State and territorial parties Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming American Samoa District of Columbia Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Democrats Abroad Affiliated groups Congress Senate Caucus Policy Committee Steering and Outreach Committee House Caucus Factions Blue Dog Coalition Congressional Progressive Caucus Justice Democrats New Democrat Coalition Problem Solvers Caucus Fundraising Democratic Attorneys General Association Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee Democratic Governors Association Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee National Conference of Democratic Mayors National Democratic Redistricting Committee Sectional College Democrats of America Democrats Abroad National Federation of Democratic Women Stonewall Democrats Stonewall Young Democrats Young Democrats of America High School Democrats of America Related Primaries Presidential candidates Debates Superdelegate 2005 chairmanship election 2017 chairmanship election 2006 House Caucus leadership election 2018 House Caucus leadership election Weekly Democratic Address v t e United States senators from Massachusetts Class 1 Dalton Cabot Goodhue Mason Adams Lloyd Gore Ashmun Mellen Mills Webster Choate Webster Winthrop Rantoul Sumner Washburn Dawes Lodge Sr. Butler Walsh Lodge Jr. J. Kennedy Smith E. Kennedy Kirk Brown Warren Class 2 Strong Sedgwick Dexter Foster Pickering Varnum Otis Lloyd Silsbee Davis Bates Davis Everett Rockwell Wilson Boutwell Hoar Crane J. Weeks Walsh Gillett Coolidge Lodge Jr. S. Weeks Saltonstall Brooke Tsongas Kerry Cowan Markey v t e Members of the U.S. House of Representatives from Massachusetts 1st district F. Ames Dexter Goodhue Holten Sedgwick Skinner Sedgwick J. Bacon Eustis Quincy Ward Jr. Mason Gorham Webster Gorham N. Appleton Gorham A. Lawrence Fletcher A. Lawrence Winthrop N. Appleton Winthrop S. Eliot W. Appleton Scudder T. D. Eliot Hall T. D. Eliot Buffington Crapo R. Davis Randall Wright G. Lawrence Treadway Heselton Conte Olver Neal 2nd district Goodhue Foster W. Lyman Sedgwick Ward Sr. W. Lyman Shepard J. Crowninshield Story Pickman W. Reed Pickering Silsbee Barstow B. Crowninshield Choate Phillips Saltonstall D. King Rantoul Fay Crocker Buffington O. Ames Harris Long E. Morse Gillett Churchill Bowles Kaynor Granfield Clason Furcolo Boland Neal McGovern 3rd district Gerry Bourne Coffin S. Lyman Mattoon Cutler Nelson Livermore White Pickering Nelson Varnum Nelson Osgood Cushing A. Abbott Duncan Edmands Damrell C. Adams Thomas A. Rice Twichell Whiting I Pierce Field B. Dean Field Ranney L. Morse J. Andrew Walker J. R. Thayer R. Hoar C. Washburn J. A. Thayer Wilder Paige F. Foss Casey Philbin Drinan Donohue Early Blute McGovern N. Tsongas Trahan 4th district Sedgwick Dearborn G. Thatcher Wadsworth Foster L. Lincoln Sr. Hastings Varnum W. Richardson Dana Stearns Fuller E. Everett Sa. Hoar Parmenter Thompson Palfrey Thompson Sabine Walley Comins A. Rice Hooper Frost J. Abbott L. Morse Collins ONeil Apsley Weymouth Tirrell Mitchell Wilder Winslow Stobbs P. Holmes Donohue Drinan Frank Kennedy III Auchincloss 5th district Partridge Bourne Freeman L. Williams T. Dwight Ely Mills Lathrop Sibley J. Davis L. Lincoln Jr. Hudson C. Allen W. Appleton Burlingame W. Appleton Hooper Alley Butler Gooch Banks Bowman L. Morse Hayden Banks Sh. Hoar Stevens Knox B. Ames J. Rogers E. Rogers B. Morse Cronin P. Tsongas Shannon Atkins Meehan N. Tsongas Markey Clark 6th district G. Thatcher Leonard J. Reed Sr. J. Smith Taggart S. Allen Locke Kendall Grennell Alvord Baker Ashmun G. Davis Upham T. Davis Alley Gooch Banks Butler Thompson Loring Stone Lovering Lodge Cogswell Moody Gardner Lufkin A.P. Andrew G. Bates W. Bates Harrington Mavroules Torkildsen Tierney Moulton 7th district Leonard Ward Sr. Leonard Bullock Bishop Mitchell Barker Baylies Turner Baylies Hulbert Shaw H. Dwight S. Allen Grennell Briggs J. Rockwell Goodrich Banks Gooch Boutwell Brooks Esty E. Hoar Tarbox Butler W. Russell Stone Cogswell W. Everett Barrett Roberts Phelan Maloney W. Connery L. Connery Lane Macdonald Markey Capuano Pressley 8th district Grout G. Thatcher F. Ames Otis Eustis L. Williams Green Gardner Green J. Reed Jr. Baylies Sampson Hobart Lathrop Bates Calhoun J. Adams Mann Wentworth Knapp Train Baldwin G. Hoar J. M. S. Williams Warren Claflin Candler W Russell C. H. Allen Greenhalge Stevens McCall Deitrick Dallinger H. Thayer Dallinger Healey Goodwin Macdonald ONeill Kennedy II Capuano Lynch 9th district Varnum Bishop J. Dean Wheaton J. Reed Jr. Folger J. Reed Jr. H. Dwight Briggs Jackson Hastings H. Williams Hale Fowler Little De Witt E. Thayer Bailey A. Walker W. Washburn Crocker G. Hoar W. Rice T. Lyman Ely Burnett Candler G. Williams ONeil Fitzgerald Conry Keliher Murray Roberts Fuller Underhill Luce R. Russell Luce T. H. Eliot Gifford Nicholson Keith McCormack Hicks Moakley Lynch Keating 10th district Goodhue Sewall Read Hastings Upham J. Allen Brigham Wheaton Morton F Baylies Bailey H. A. S. Dearborn W. Baylies Borden H. Williams Borden Burnell Grinnell Scudder Dickinson Chaffee Delano Dawes Crocker Stevens Seelye Norcross W. Rice J. E. Russell J. Walker McEttrick Atwood Barrows Naphen McNary OConnell Curley Murray Tague Fitzgerald Tague Douglass Tinkham Herter Curtis Martin Heckler Studds Delahunt Keating 11th district Bradbury Bartlett Cutler Stedman A. Bigelow Brigham B. Adams J. Russell Hobart J. Richardson J. Adams J. Reed Jr. Burnell Goodrich Trafton Dawes Chapin Robinson Whiting II Wallace Coolidge Draper Sprague Powers Sullivan Peters Tinkham Douglass Higgins Flaherty Curley Kennedy ONeill Burke Donnelly 12th district H. Dearborn I. Parker Lee S. Thatcher Skinner Larned Bidwell Bacon Dewey Hulbert Strong Kendall L. Bigelow Baylies Hodges J. Adams Robinson F. Rockwell Crosby E. Morse Lovering Powers Weeks Curley Gallivan McCormack Keith Studds 13th district Wadsworth Seaver Ruggles Dowse Eustis J. Reed Jr. Randall Simpkins Greene Weeks Mitchell Carter Luce Wigglesworth Burke 14th district G. Thatcher Cutts C. King J. Holmes Lovering E. Foss Harris Gilmore Olney Frothingham Wigglesworth Martin 15th district Wadsworth Ilsley Whitman Widgery Bradbury Whitman Greene Leach Martin Gifford 16th district S. Thatcher Cook Tallman S. Davis Brown Orr Hill Thacher Walsh Gifford 17th district Bruce Chandler Gannett F. Carr Wood J. Carr Wilson Kinsley 18th district Wilson T. Rice J. Parker 19th district J. Parker Conner Gage Cushman 20th district Hubbard Parris E. Lincoln At-large Cobb v t e Massachusetts s delegations to the 80th86th United States Congress ordered by seniority 80th Senate : L. Saltonstall R H. C. Lodge Jr. R House : C. Gifford R J. Martin R E. N. Rogers R J. McCormack D R. Wigglesworth R C. Clason R T. Lane D G. Bates R A. Goodwin R C. Herter R P. Philbin D J. Heselton R H. Donohue D J. F. Kennedy D D. Nicholson R 81st Senate : L. Saltonstall R H. C. Lodge Jr. R House : J. Martin R E. N. Rogers R J. McCormack D R. Wigglesworth R T. Lane D G. Bates R A. Goodwin R C. Herter R P. Philbin D J. Heselton R H. Donohue D J. F. Kennedy D D. Nicholson R F. Furcolo D W. Bates R 82nd Senate : L. Saltonstall R H. C. Lodge Jr. R House : J. Martin R E. N. Rogers R J. McCormack D R. Wigglesworth R T. Lane D A. Goodwin R C. Herter R P. Philbin D J. Heselton R H. Donohue D J. F. Kennedy D D. Nicholson R F. Furcolo D W. Bates R 83rd Senate : L. Saltonstall R J. F. Kennedy D House : J. Martin R E. N. Rogers R J. McCormack D R. Wigglesworth R T. Lane D A. Goodwin R P. Philbin D J. Heselton R H. Donohue D D. Nicholson R W. Bates R E. Boland D L. Curtis R T. ONeill D 84th Senate : L. Saltonstall R J. F. Kennedy D House : J. Martin R E. N. Rogers R J. McCormack D R. Wigglesworth R T. Lane D P. Philbin D J. Heselton R H. Donohue D D. Nicholson R W. Bates R E. Boland D L. Curtis R T. ONeill D T. Macdonald D 85th Senate : L. Saltonstall R J. F. Kennedy D House : J. Martin R E. N. Rogers R J. McCormack D R. Wigglesworth R T. Lane D P. Philbin D J. Heselton R H. Donohue D D. Nicholson R W. Bates R E. Boland D L. Curtis R T. ONeill D T. Macdonald D 86th Senate : L. Saltonstall R J. F. Kennedy D B. Smith II D House : J. Martin R E. N. Rogers R J. McCormack D T. Lane D P. Philbin D H. Donohue D W. Bates R E. Boland D L. Curtis R T. ONeill D T. Macdonald D S. Conte R J. Burke D H. Keith R v t e Cold War United States Soviet Union NATO Warsaw Pact ANZUS METO SEATO NEATO Rio Pact Non-Aligned Movement 1940s Morgenthau Plan Hukbalahap Rebellion Jamaican political conflict Dekemvriana Guerrilla war in the Baltic states Operation Priboi Operation Jungle Occupation of the Baltic states Cursed soldiers Operation Unthinkable Gouzenko Affair Division of Korea Indonesian National Revolution Operation Masterdom Operation Beleaguer Operation Blacklist Forty Iran crisis of 1946 Greek Civil War Baruch Plan Corfu Channel incident Turkish straits crisis Restatement of Policy on Germany First Indochina War 1947 Polish parliamentary election Truman Doctrine Asian Relations Conference May 1947 crises Partition of India Indo-Pakistani war of 19471948 19471949 Palestine war 19471948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine 1948 ArabIsraeli War 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight Marshall Plan Comecon 1948 Czechoslovak coup detat Incapacitation of the Allied Control Council Al-Wathbah uprising TitoStalin split Berlin Blockade Annexation of Hyderabad Madiun Affair Western betrayal Iron Curtain Eastern Bloc Western Bloc Chinese Civil War Chinese Communist Revolution Malayan Emergency March 1949 Syrian coup detat Operation Valuable 1950s Bamboo Curtain McCarthyism Korean War Arab Cold War 19521979 1952 Egyptian revolution Iraqi Intifada 1952 Mau Mau rebellion East German uprising of 1953 1953 Iranian coup detat Pact of Madrid Bricker Amendment 1954 Syrian coup detat Petrov Affair Domino theory 1954 Geneva Conference 1954 Guatemalan coup detat Capture of the Tuapse First Taiwan Strait Crisis Jebel Akhdar War Algerian War Kashmir Princess Bandung Conference Geneva Summit 1955 Vietnam War Cyprus Emergency On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences 1956 Poznan protests Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Polish October Suez Crisis We will bury you Operation Gladio Syrian Crisis of 1957 Sputnik crisis Ifni War Iraqi 14 July Revolution 1958 Lebanon crisis Second Taiwan Strait Crisis 1959 Mosul uprising 1959 Tibetan uprising Laotian Civil War Kitchen Debate Cuban Revolution Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution Sino-Soviet split 1960s Congo Crisis Simba rebellion 1960 U-2 incident Bay of Pigs Invasion 1960 Turkish coup detat AlbanianSoviet split Expulsion of Soviets from Albania IraqiKurdish conflict First IraqiKurdish War Berlin Crisis of 1961 Berlin Wall Annexation of Goa Papua conflict IndonesiaMalaysia confrontation Sand War Portuguese Colonial War Angolan War of Independence Guinea-Bissau War of Independence Mozambican War of Independence Cuban Missile Crisis El Portenazo Sino-Indian War Communist insurgency in Sarawak Ramadan Revolution Eritrean War of Independence North Yemen civil war 1963 Syrian coup detat Assassination of John F. Kennedy Aden Emergency Cyprus crisis of 19631964 Shifta War Mexican Dirty War Tlatelolco massacre Guatemalan Civil War Colombian conflict 1964 Brazilian coup detat Dominican Civil War Rhodesian Bush War Indonesian mass killings of 19651966 Transition to the New Order Indonesia ASEAN Declaration 1966 Syrian coup detat Cultural Revolution Argentine Revolution South African Border War Korean DMZ Conflict 12-3 incident Greek junta 1967 Hong Kong riots Years of Lead Italy Six-Day War War of Attrition Dhofar War Al-Wadiah War Nigerian Civil War Protests of 1968 May 68 Prague Spring USS Pueblo incident 1968 Polish political crisis 19681971 East Pakistan communist insurgency Communist insurgency in Malaysia Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia 17 July Revolution 1968 Peruvian coup detat Revolutionary Government 1969 Sudanese coup detat 1969 Libyan revolution Goulash Communism Sino-Soviet border conflict New Peoples Army rebellion 1970s Detente Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Black September Alcora Exercise Corrective Movement Syria Western Sahara conflict Cambodian Civil War Communist insurgency in Thailand 1970 Polish protests Koza riot Realpolitik Ping-pong diplomacy 1971 JVP insurrection Corrective revolution Egypt 1971 Turkish military memorandum 1971 Sudanese coup detat Four Power Agreement on Berlin Bangladesh Liberation War 1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China North Yemen-South Yemen Border conflict of 1972 First Yemenite War Munich massacre 19721975 Bangladesh insurgency Eritrean Civil Wars 1973 Uruguayan coup detat 1973 Afghan coup detat 1973 Chilean coup detat Yom Kippur War 1973 oil crisis Carnation Revolution Spanish transition to democracy Metapolitefsi Strategic Arms Limitation Talks Second IraqiKurdish War Turkish invasion of Cyprus Angolan Civil War Cambodian genocide June 1976 protests Mozambican Civil War Oromo conflict Ogaden War 1978 Somali coup attempt Western Sahara War Ethiopian Civil War Lebanese Civil War Sino-Albanian split Third Indochina War CambodianVietnamese War Cambodian conflict Operation Condor Dirty War Argentina 1976 Argentine coup detat EgyptianLibyan War German Autumn Korean Air Lines Flight 902 Nicaraguan Revolution UgandaTanzania War NDF Rebellion ChadianLibyan War Second Yemenite War Grand Mosque seizure Iranian revolution Saur Revolution Sino-Vietnamese War New Jewel Movement 1979 Herat uprising Seven Days to the River Rhine Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union 1980s Salvadoran Civil War SovietAfghan War 1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts Gera Demands Peruvian Revolution Gdansk Agreement Solidarity Eritrean Civil Wars 1980 Turkish coup detat Ugandan Bush War Gulf of Sidra incident Martial law in Poland Casamance conflict Falklands War 1982 EthiopianSomali Border War Ndogboyosoi War United States invasion of Grenada Able Archer 83 Star Wars 1985 Geneva Summit IranIraq War Somali Rebellion Reykjavik Summit 1986 Black Sea incident South Yemen civil war Toyota War 1987 Lieyu massacre Operation Denver 19871989 JVP insurrection Lords Resistance Army insurgency 1988 Black Sea bumping incident 8888 Uprising Solidarity Soviet reaction Contras Central American crisis Operation RYAN Korean Air Lines Flight 007 People Power Revolution Glasnost Perestroika Bougainville conflict First Nagorno-Karabakh War Afghan Civil War United States invasion of Panama 1988 Polish strikes Polish Round Table Agreement 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre Revolutions of 1989 Fall of the Berlin Wall Fall of the inner German border Velvet Revolution Romanian Revolution Peaceful Revolution 1990s Mongolian Revolution of 1990 Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident Gulf War Min Ping Yu No. 5202 German reunification Yemeni unification Fall of communism in Albania Breakup of Yugoslavia Dissolution of the Soviet Union 1991 August Coup Dissolution of Czechoslovakia Frozen conflicts Abkhazia China-Taiwan Korea Kosovo South Ossetia Transnistria Sino-Indian border dispute North Borneo dispute Foreign policy Truman Doctrine Containment Eisenhower Doctrine Domino theory Hallstein Doctrine Kennedy Doctrine Peaceful coexistence Ostpolitik Johnson Doctrine Brezhnev Doctrine Nixon Doctrine Ulbricht Doctrine Carter Doctrine Reagan Doctrine Rollback Kinmen Agreement Ideologies Capitalism Liberalism Chicago school Conservatism American conservatism Keynesianism Libertarianism Monetarism Neoclassical economics Reaganomics Supply-side economics Democratic capitalism Socialism Communism MarxismLeninism Castroism Eurocommunism Guevarism Hoxhaism Juche Ho Chi Minh Thought Maoism Trotskyism Stalinism Titoism Other Imperialism Anti-imperialism Nationalism Ultranationalism Chauvinism Ethnic nationalism Racism Zionism Anti-Zionism Fascism Neo-Nazism Islamism Totalitarianism Authoritarianism Autocracy Liberal democracy Illiberal democracy Guided democracy Social democracy Third-worldism White supremacy White nationalism White separatism Apartheid Organizations NATO SEATO METO EEC Warsaw Pact Comecon Non-Aligned Movement NN States ASEAN SAARC Safari Club Propaganda Pro-communist Active measures Izvestia Neues Deutschland Pravda Radio Moscow Rude pravo Trybuna Ludu TASS Soviet Life Pro-Western Amerika Crusade for Freedom Paix et Liberte Radio Free EuropeRadio Liberty Red Scare Voice of America Technological competition Arms race Nuclear arms race Space Race Historians Gar Alperovitz Thomas A. Bailey Michael Beschloss Archie Brown Warren H. Carroll Adrian Cioroianu John Costello Michael Cox Nicholas J. Cull Norman Davies Willem Drees Robert D. English Herbert Feis Robert Hugh Ferrell Andre Fontaine Anneli Ute Gabanyi John Lewis Gaddis Lloyd Gardner Timothy Garton Ash Gabriel Gorodetsky Fred Halliday Jussi Hanhimaki John Earl Haynes Patrick J. Hearden Tvrtko Jakovina Tony Judt Harvey Klehr Gabriel Kolko Walter LaFeber Walter Laqueur Melvyn P. Leffler Geir Lundestad Vojtech Mastny Jack F. Matlock Jr. Thomas J. McCormick Timothy Naftali Marius Oprea David S. Painter William B. Pickett Ronald E. Powaski Yakov M. Rabkin Mary Elise Sarotte Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. Ellen Schrecker Giles Scott-Smith Shen Zhihua Timothy Snyder Athan Theoharis Andrew Thorpe Vladimir Tismaneanu Patrick Vaughan Alex von Tunzelmann Odd Arne Westad William Appleman Williams Jonathan Reed Winkler Rudolph Winnacker Ken Young Espionage and intelligence List of Eastern Bloc agents in the United States Soviet espionage in the United States Russian espionage in the United States American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation CIA and the Cultural Cold War CIA MI5 MI6 United States involvement in regime change Soviet involvement in regime change MVD KGB Stasi See also Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War Soviet UnionUnited States relations Soviet UnionUnited States summits RussiaNATO relations War on terror Brinkmanship Second Cold War Russian Revolution Category List of conflicts Timeline v t e Buddhist crisis Events Hue Phat an Vesak shootings Hue chemical attacks Self-immolation of Thich Quang uc Double Seven Day scuffle Xa Loi Pagoda raids 1963 South Vietnamese coup detat reaction Arrest and assassination of Ngo Dinh Diem Policy Joint Communique Cable 243 KrulakMendenhall mission McNamaraTaylor mission Political or religious figures Bui Van Luong Buu Hoi Thich Quang uc Michael Forrestal W. Averell Harriman Roger Hilsman Thich Thien Hoa John F. Kennedy Thich Tinh Khiet Victor H. Krulak Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. Robert McNamara Joseph Mendenhall Ngo inh Can Ngo inh Diem Ngo inh Nhu Ngo inh Thuc Nguyen Ngoc Tho Nguyen inh Thuan Madame Nhu Frederick Nolting Thich Tri Quang Maxwell D. Taylor Tran Van Chuong William Trueheart Vu Van Mau Military figures Lucien Conein o Cao Tri o Mau Duong Van Minh Huynh Van Cao Le Quang Tung Le Van Kim Nguyen Huu Co Nguyen Khanh Nguyen Van Nhung Nguyen Van Thieu Pham Ngoc Thao Ton That inh Tran Kim Tuyen Tran Thien Khiem Tran Van on Journalists Peter Arnett Malcolm Browne David Halberstam Marguerite Higgins Neil Sheehan Related Persecution of Buddhists v t e PT-109 Craft PT boat PT-109 PT-59 Japanese destroyer Amagiri People John F. Kennedy Biuku Gasa and Eroni Kumana Reg Evans Andrew Kirksey and Harold Marney Media 1962 Song 1963 Film 1987 Video game The Search for Kennedys PT 109 2002 film PT 109: An American Epic of War Survival and the Destiny of John F. Kennedy 2015 book Related Kasolo Island Kennedy Island v t e Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Life events Hammersmith Farm Hickory Hill Kennedy Compound La Querida Wexford 1040 Fifth Avenue First Lady of the United States White House restoration Televised White House tour Tour of India and Pakistan White House Historical Association White House Curator Committee for the Preservation of the White House Assassination of John F. Kennedy State funeral of John F. Kennedy John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum Eternal Flame and burial site Fashion Wedding dress of Jacqueline Bouvier Pink Chanel suit Honors and memorials Jacqueline Kennedy Garden Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis High School for International Careers Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Reservoir Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis School ballet Related Cultural depictions Jackie O 1997 opera Jackie 2016 film Family John F. Kennedy first husband presidency Aristotle Onassis second husband Caroline Kennedy daughter John F. Kennedy Jr. son Patrick Bouvier Kennedy son Jack Schlossberg grandson Rose Schlossberg granddaughter Tatiana Schlossberg granddaughter John Vernou Bouvier III father Janet Lee Bouvier mother Lee Radziwill sister Hugh D. Auchincloss stepfather Janet Auchincloss Rutherfurd half-sister Edith Ewing Bouvier aunt Edith Bouvier Beale cousin James T. Lee grandfather John Vernou Bouvier Jr. grandfather Pushinka dog v t e Robert F. Kennedy November 20 1925 June 6 1968 64th United States Attorney General 19611964 United States senator from New York 19651968 Life 1948 Palestine visit Senate Committee investigation of Labor and Management Cuban Missile Crisis ExComm Civil rights Freedom Riders Voter Education Project BaldwinKennedy meeting 1964 Democratic National Convention Bedford Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation Mississippi Delta tour Kennedy Compound Hickory Hill home Electoral 1964 U.S. Senate election 1968 presidential campaign primaries Boiler Room Girls Speeches Law Day Address 1961 Day of Affirmation Address 1966 Conflict in Vietnam and at Home 1968 University of Kansas 1968 Ball State 1968 On the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. 1968 On the Mindless Menace of Violence 1968 Books The Enemy Within 1960 The Pursuit of Justice 1964 To Seek a Newer World 1967 Thirteen Days: A Memoir of the Cuban Missile Crisis 1969 Assassination Sirhan Sirhan Ambassador Hotel Conspiracy theories Gravesite Legacy and memorials Robert F. Kennedy Department of Justice Building Robert F. Kennedy silver dollar Robert F. Kennedy Center for Justice and Human Rights Human Rights Award Journalism Award Book Award Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium Brooklyn Memorial Landmark for Peace Memorial Arch of Dignity Equality and Justice KennedyKing College Robert F. Kennedy Community Schools Robert F. Kennedy Bridge Popular culture Robert F. Kennedy in media Crisis: Behind a Presidential Commitment 1963 documentary Robert Kennedy Remembered 1968 documentary Abraham Martin and John 1968 song The Missiles of October 1974 docudrama Kennedy 1983 miniseries Blood Feud 1983 film Prince Jack 1985 film Robert Kennedy and His Times 1985 miniseries Hoover vs. The Kennedys 1987 miniseries Thirteen Days 2000 film RFK 2002 film Bobby 2006 film RFK Must Die 2007 documentary The Kennedys 2011 miniseries Ethel 2012 documentary Killing Kennedy 2013 film Jackie 2016 film Bobby Kennedy for President 2018 miniseries Family family tree Ethel Skakel wife Kathleen Kennedy daughter Joseph Patrick Kennedy son Robert F. Kennedy Jr. son Michael LeMoyne Kennedy son Kerry Kennedy daughter Christopher G. Kennedy son Max Kennedy son Douglas Harriman Kennedy son Rory Kennedy daughter Maeve Kennedy McKean granddaughter Joseph P. Kennedy III grandson Max Kennedy Jr. grandson Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. father Rose Kennedy mother Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. brother John F. Kennedy brother presidency Rosemary Kennedy sister Kathleen Kennedy Cavendish sister Eunice Kennedy Shriver sister Patricia Kennedy Lawford sister Jean Kennedy Smith sister Ted Kennedy brother Patrick J. Kennedy grandfather Mary Augusta Kennedy grandmother John F. Fitzgerald grandfather Category v t e Ted Kennedy February 22 1932 August 25 2009 United States Senator from Massachusetts 19622009 Electoral history U.S. Senate elections in Massachusetts: 1962 special 1964 1970 1976 1982 1988 1994 2000 2006 1980 United States presidential election Democratic primaries Ted Kennedy 1980 presidential campaign Books My Senator and Me: A Dogs-Eye View of Washington D.C. 2006 True Compass 2009 Speeches The Dream Shall Never Die Family family tree Joan Bennett Kennedy first wife Victoria Reggie Kennedy second wife widow Kara Kennedy daughter Edward M. Kennedy Jr. son Patrick J. Kennedy II son Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. father Rose Kennedy mother Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. brother John F. Kennedy brother presidency Rosemary Kennedy sister Kathleen Kennedy sister Eunice Kennedy Shriver sister Patricia Kennedy Lawford sister Robert F. Kennedy brother Jean Kennedy Smith sister Patrick J. Kennedy I grandfather John F. Fitzgerald grandfather Related Awards and honors Political positions Kennedy Compound Edward M. Kennedy Institute for the United States Senate Edward M. Kennedy Serve America Act Chappaquiddick incident Mary Jo Kopechne Friends of Ireland Chappaquiddick 2018 film Category v t e Kennedy family I. P. J. Kennedy 18581929 Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. m. Rose Fitzgerald II. Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. 18881969 Joseph P. Kennedy Jr. John F. Kennedy m. Jacqueline Bouvier Rosemary Kennedy Kathleen Kennedy m. William Cavendish Marquess of Hartington Eunice Kennedy m. Sargent Shriver Patricia Kennedy m.div. Peter Lawford Robert F. Kennedy m. Ethel Skakel Jean Kennedy m. Stephen Edward Smith Edward M. Ted Kennedy m.div. 1st Joan Bennett ; m. 2nd Victoria Reggie III. John F. Kennedy 19171963 Caroline Kennedy m. Edwin Schlossberg John F. Kennedy Jr. m. Carolyn Bessette Patrick Bouvier Kennedy Eunice Kennedy Shriver 19212009 Bobby Shriver Maria Shriver m.div. Arnold Schwarzenegger Timothy Shriver Mark Shriver Anthony Shriver Patricia Kennedy Lawford 19242006 Christopher Lawford Robert F. Kennedy 19251968 Kathleen Kennedy Townsend Joseph P. Kennedy II Robert F. Kennedy Jr. m.sep. Mary Richardson m. 3rd Cheryl Hines Michael LeMoyne Kennedy Kerry Kennedy m.div. Andrew Cuomo Christopher G. Kennedy Max Kennedy Douglas Harriman Kennedy Rory Kennedy m. Mark Bailey Jean Kennedy Smith 19282020 William Kennedy Smith Ted Kennedy 19322009 Kara Kennedy Edward M. Kennedy Jr. Patrick J. Kennedy m. Amy Kennedy IV. Rose Kennedy Schlossberg Tatiana Celia Kennedy Schlossberg John Bouvier Kennedy Schlossberg Katherine Schwarzenegger m. Chris Pratt Patrick Schwarzenegger Joseph P. Kennedy III Maeve Kennedy McKean Max Kennedy Jr. Related Hickory Hill Kennedy Compound Kennedy curse Merchandise Mart The Kennedys museum The Kennedys miniseries The Kennedys: After Camelot Category Kennedy family m. married; div. divorced; sep. separated. v t e 1952 1956 United States presidential election 1960 Republican Party Convention Primaries Candidates Incumbent nominee: Dwight D. Eisenhower Incumbent VP nominee: Richard Nixon Democratic Party Convention Primaries Candidates Nominee: Adlai Stevenson II VP nominee: Estes Kefauver Other candidates: John S. Battle Happy Chandler James C. Davis W. Averell Harriman Lyndon B. Johnson Frank Lausche George Bell Timmerman Jr. Third-party and independent candidates American Vegetarian Party Nominee: Herbert M. Shelton VP nominee: Symon Gould Prohibition Party Nominee: Enoch A. Holtwick VP nominee: Herbert C. Holdridge Socialist Labor Party Nominee: Eric Hass VP nominee: Georgia Cozzini Socialist Party Nominee: Darlington Hoopes VP nominee: Samuel H. Friedman Socialist Workers Party Nominee: Farrell Dobbs VP nominee: Myra Tanner Weiss Independents and other candidates T. Coleman Andrews Gerald L. K. Smith Other 1956 elections : House Senate v t e 1956 1960 United States presidential election 1964 Democratic Party Convention Primaries Candidates Nominee: John F. Kennedy campaign VP nominee: Lyndon B. Johnson Other candidates Ross Barnett Pat Brown Michael DiSalle Paul C. Fisher Hubert Humphrey Lyndon B. Johnson George H. McLain Robert B. Meyner Wayne Morse Albert S. Porter Adlai Stevenson II George Smathers Stuart Symington Republican Party Convention Primaries Candidates Nominee: Richard Nixon campaign VP nominee: Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. Other candidates Barry Goldwater Henry Cabot Lodge Jr. James M. Lloyd Nelson Rockefeller Third-party and independent candidates American Vegetarian Party Nominee Symon Gould National States Rights Party Nominee Orval Faubus VP nominee J. B. Stoner Prohibition Party Nominee Rutherford Decker VP nominee E. Harold Munn Socialist Labor Party Nominee Eric Hass VP nominee Georgia Cozzini Socialist Workers Party Nominee Farrell Dobbs VP nominee Myra Tanner Weiss Independents and other candidates Harry F. Byrd Merritt B. Curtis Lar Daly George Lincoln Rockwell Charles L. Sullivan Other 1960 elections: House Senate v t e Cabinet of President John F. Kennedy 19611963 Cabinet Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson 19611963 Secretary of State Dean Rusk 19611963 Secretary of the Treasury C. Douglas Dillon 19611963 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara 19611963 Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy 19611963 Postmaster General J. Edward Day 19611963 John A. Gronouski 1963 Secretary of the Interior Stewart Udall 19611963 Secretary of Agriculture Orville Freeman 19611963 Secretary of Commerce Luther H. Hodges 19611963 Secretary of Labor Arthur Goldberg 19611962 W. Willard Wirtz 19621963 Secretary of Health Education and Welfare Abraham Ribicoff 19611962 Anthony J. Celebrezze 19621963 Cabinet-level Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson II 19611963 v t e Time Persons of the Year 19271950 Charles Lindbergh 1927 Walter Chrysler 1928 Owen D. Young 1929 Mohandas Gandhi 1930 Pierre Laval 1931 Franklin D. Roosevelt 1932 Hugh S. Johnson 1933 Franklin D. Roosevelt 1934 Haile Selassie 1935 Wallis Simpson 1936 Chiang Kai-shek Soong Mei-ling 1937 Adolf Hitler 1938 Joseph Stalin 1939 Winston Churchill 1940 Franklin D. Roosevelt 1941 Joseph Stalin 1942 George Marshall 1943 Dwight D. Eisenhower 1944 Harry S. Truman 1945 James F. Byrnes 1946 George Marshall 1947 Harry S. Truman 1948 Winston Churchill 1949 The American Fighting-Man 1950 19511975 Mohammed Mosaddeq 1951 Elizabeth II 1952 Konrad Adenauer 1953 John Foster Dulles 1954 Harlow Curtice 1955 Hungarian Freedom Fighters 1956 Nikita Khrushchev 1957 Charles de Gaulle 1958 Dwight D. Eisenhower 1959 U.S. Scientists: George Beadle Charles Draper John Enders Donald A. Glaser Joshua Lederberg Willard Libby Linus Pauling Edward Purcell Isidor Rabi Emilio Segre William Shockley Edward Teller Charles Townes James Van Allen Robert Woodward 1960 John F. Kennedy 1961 Pope John XXIII 1962 Martin Luther King Jr. 1963 Lyndon B. Johnson 1964 William Westmoreland 1965 The Generation Twenty-Five and Under 1966 Lyndon B. Johnson 1967 The Apollo 8 Astronauts : William Anders Frank Borman Jim Lovell 1968 The Middle Americans 1969 Willy Brandt 1970 Richard Nixon 1971 Henry Kissinger Richard Nixon 1972 John Sirica 1973 King Faisal 1974 American Women: Susan Brownmiller Kathleen Byerly Alison Cheek Jill Conway Betty Ford Ella Grasso Carla Hills Barbara Jordan Billie Jean King Susie Sharp Carol Sutton Addie Wyatt 1975 19762000 Jimmy Carter 1976 Anwar Sadat 1977 Deng Xiaoping 1978 Ayatollah Khomeini 1979 Ronald Reagan 1980 Lech Waesa 1981 The Computer 1982 Ronald Reagan Yuri Andropov 1983 Peter Ueberroth 1984 Deng Xiaoping 1985 Corazon Aquino 1986 Mikhail Gorbachev 1987 The Endangered Earth 1988 Mikhail Gorbachev 1989 George H. W. Bush 1990 Ted Turner 1991 Bill Clinton 1992 The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat F. W. de Klerk Nelson Mandela Yitzhak Rabin 1993 Pope John Paul II 1994 Newt Gingrich 1995 David Ho 1996 Andrew Grove 1997 Bill Clinton Ken Starr 1998 Jeff Bezos 1999 George W. Bush 2000 2001present Rudolph Giuliani 2001 The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper Coleen Rowley Sherron Watkins 2002 The American Soldier 2003 George W. Bush 2004 The Good Samaritans: Bono Bill Gates Melinda Gates 2005 You 2006 Vladimir Putin 2007 Barack Obama 2008 Ben Bernanke 2009 Mark Zuckerberg 2010 The Protester 2011 Barack Obama 2012 Pope Francis 2013 Ebola Fighters : Dr. Jerry Brown Dr. Kent Brantly Ella Watson-Stryker Foday Gollah Salome Karwah 2014 Angela Merkel 2015 Donald Trump 2016 The Silence Breakers 2017 The Guardians: Jamal Khashoggi Maria Ressa Wa Lone Kyaw Soe Oo Staff of The Capital 2018 Greta Thunberg 2019 Joe Biden Kamala Harris 2020 Elon Musk 2021 Volodymyr Zelenskyy Spirit of Ukraine 2022 Taylor Swift 2023 v t e Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography 19511975 Margaret Louise Coit 1951 Merlo J. Pusey 1952 David J. Mays 1953 Charles A. Lindbergh 1954 William S. White 1955 Talbot Faulkner Hamlin 1956 John F. Kennedy 1957 Douglas Southall Freeman John Alexander Carroll and Mary Wells Ashworth 1958 Arthur Walworth 1959 Samuel Eliot Morison 1960 David Donald 1961 Leon Edel 1963 Walter Jackson Bate 1964 Ernest Samuels 1965 Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. 1966 Justin Kaplan 1967 George Frost Kennan 1968 Benjamin Lawrence Reid 1969 Thomas Harry Williams 1970 Lawrance Thompson 1971 Joseph P. Lash 1972 W. A. Swanberg 1973 Louis Sheaffer 1974 Robert Caro 1975 Complete list 19171925 19261950 19511975 19762000 20012025 v t e National Football Foundation Gold Medal winners 1958: Dwight D. Eisenhower 1959: Douglas MacArthur 1960: Herbert Hoover Amos Alonzo Stagg 1961: John F. Kennedy 1962: Byron Whizzer White 1963: Roger Blough 1964: Donold B. Lourie 1965: Juan T. Trippe 1966: Earl H. Red Blaik 1967: Frederick L. Hovde 1968: Chester J. LaRoche 1969: Richard Nixon 1970: Thomas J. Hamilton 1971: Ronald Reagan 1972: Gerald Ford 1973: John Wayne 1974: Gerald B. Zornow 1975: David Packard 1976: Edgar B. Speer 1977: Louis H. Wilson 1978: Vincent dePaul Draddy 1979: William P. Lawrence 1980: Walter J. Zable 1981: Justin W. Dart 1982: Silver Anniversary Awards NCAA - All Honored Jim Brown Willie Davis Jack Kemp Ron Kramer Jim Swink 1983: Jack Kemp 1984: John F. McGillicuddy 1985: William I. Spencer 1986: William H. Morton 1987: Charles R. Meyer 1988: Clinton E. Frank 1989: Paul Brown 1990: Thomas H. Moorer 1991: George H. W. Bush 1992: Donald R. Keough 1993: Norman Schwarzkopf 1994: Thomas S. Murphy 1995: Harold Alfond 1996: Gene Corrigan 1997: Jackie Robinson 1998: John H. McConnell 1999: Keith Jackson 2000: Fred M. Kirby II 2001: Billy Joe Red McCombs 2002: George Steinbrenner 2003: Tommy Franks 2004: William V. Campbell 2005: Jon F. Hanson 2006: Joe Paterno Bobby Bowden 2007: Pete Dawkins Roger Staubach 2008: John Glenn 2009: Phil Knight Bill Bowerman 2010: Bill Cosby 2011: Robert Gates 2012: Roscoe Brown 2013: National Football League Roger Goodell 2014: Tom Catena George Weiss 2015: Condoleezza Rice 2016: Archie Manning 2017: None awarded 2018: Aaron Feis Jason Seaman 2019: Mark Harmon v t e Assassination of John F. Kennedy John F. Kennedy Lee Harvey Oswald Assassination Assassination rifle Timeline J. D. Tippit John Connally Nellie Connally Jacqueline Kennedy Pink Chanel suit James Tague William Greer Roy Kellerman Clint Hill Zapruder film Abraham Zapruder Dealey Plaza Texas School Book Depository Sixth Floor Museum Presidential limousine Parkland Hospital Witnesses Ike Altgens Marie Muchmore Orville Nix Three tramps Babushka Lady Mary Moorman Umbrella man Aftermath Media coverage Autopsy Reactions Johnson inauguration Jack Ruby Jack Ruby Shoots Lee Harvey Oswald Ruby v. Texas Dictabelt recording Conspiracy theories Badge Man CIA Single-bullet theory 1992 Assassination Records Act In popular culture Robert N. McClelland surgeon Charles Baxter physician Malcolm Perry physician Earl Rose coroner Dallas memorial State funeral Foreign dignitaries Burial site and Eternal Flame Black Jack horse Investigations Warren Commission Jim Garrison investigation House Select Committee on Assassinations Researchers Category v t e Pacem in Terris Peace and Freedom Award laureates 1960s 1964: John Howard Griffin John F. Kennedy 1965: Martin Luther King Jr. 1966: R. Sargent Shriver 1967: A. Philip Randolph 1968: James Groppi 1969: Saul Alinsky 1970s 1971: Dorothy Day 1974: Harold Hughes 1975: Helder Camara 1976: Mother Teresa 1979: Thomas Gumbleton 1980s 1980: Crystal Lee Sutton Ernest Leo Unterkoefler 1982: George F. Kennan 1983: Helen Caldicott 1985: Joseph Bernardin 1986: Maurice John Dingman 1987: Desmond Tutu 1989: Eileen Egan 1990s 1990: Mairead Maguire 1991: Maria Julia Hernandez 1992: Cesar Chavez 1993: Daniel Berrigan 1995: Jim Wallis 1996: Samuel Ruiz 1997: Jim and Shelley Douglass 2000s 2000: George G. Higgins 2001: Lech Waesa 2002: Gwen Hennessey Dorothy Hennessey 2004: Arthur Simon 2005: Donald Mosley 2007: Salim Ghazal 2008: Marvin Mottet 2009: Hildegard Goss-Mayr 2010s 2010: John Dear 2011: Alvaro Leonel Ramazzini Imeri 2012: Kim Bobo 2013: Jean Vanier 2014: Simone Campbell 2015: Thich Nhat Hanh 2016: Gustavo Gutierrez 2017: Widad Akreyi 2019: Dalai Lama 2019: Munib Younan 2020s 2022: Norma Pimentel v t e Individuals lain in state in honor and in repose in the United States State funerals in the United States Lain in state US Capitol rotunda Clay 1852 Lincoln 1865 funeral Stevens 1868 Sumner 1874 Wilson 1875 Garfield 1881 Logan 1886 McKinley 1901 LEnfant 1909 Dewey 1917 Unknown Soldier for World War I 1921 Harding 1923 W. H. Taft 1930 Pershing 1948 R. A. Taft 1953 Unknown Soldiers for World War II and the Korean War 1958 Kennedy 1963 funeral MacArthur 1964 H. Hoover 1964 Eisenhower 1969 Dirksen 1969 J. E. Hoover 1972 Johnson 1973 Humphrey 1978 Blassie Unknown Soldier for the Vietnam War 1984 Pepper 1989 Reagan 2004 funeral Ford 200607 funeral Inouye 2012 McCain 2018 Bush 2018 funeral Lewis 2020 Dole 2021 Reid 2022 National Statuary Hall Cummings 2019 Ginsburg 2020 funeral Young 2022 House Chamber Hooper 1875 Herbert C. Hoover Building Brown 1996 Old Senate Chamber Chase 1873 Lain in honor US Capitol rotunda Chestnut and Gibson 1998 Parks 2005 Graham 2018 Sicknick 2021 Evans 2021 Williams 2022 Lain in repose East Room Harrison 1841 Taylor 1850 Lincoln 1865 funeral McKinley 1901 Harding 1923 Roosevelt 1945 Kennedy 1963 funeral Great Hall of the US Supreme Court Warren 1974 Marshall 1993 Burger 1995 Brennan 1997 Blackmun 1999 Rehnquist 2005 Scalia 2016 Stevens 2019 Ginsburg 2020 funeral OConnor 2023 Senate Chamber Byrd 2010 Lautenberg 2013 Bold : Presidents and chief justices Portals : 1960s Biography Civil Rights Movement History Liberalism Massachusetts Politics United States Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz RKD Artists People US Congress Trove Deutsche Biographie Deutsche Synchronkartei Other IdRef NARA SNAC 2 3 4 Retrieved from https:en.wikipedia.orgwindex.php?titleJohnF.Kennedyoldid1250874481 Categories : John F. Kennedy 1917 births 1963 deaths 1956 United States vice-presidential candidates Politicians assassinated in the 1960s 1963 murders in the United States 20th-century American journalists 20th-century American male writers National presidents assassinated in the 20th century 20th-century presidents of the United States 20th-century Massachusetts politicians 20th-century Roman Catholics Activists for African-American civil rights Alumni of the London School of Economics American anti-communists American expatriates in the Solomon Islands American male journalists American people of Irish descent American Roman Catholics Assassinated presidents of the United States Bouvier family Burials at Arlington National Cemetery Canterbury School Connecticut alumni Catholic politicians from Massachusetts Choate Rosemary Hall alumni Candidates in the 1960 United States presidential election Deaths by firearm in Texas Democratic Party members of the United States House of Representatives from Massachusetts Democratic Party presidents of the United States Democratic Party United States senators from Massachusetts Journalists from Massachusetts Harvard College alumni Kennedy family Laetare Medal recipients Liberalism in the United States Military personnel from Massachusetts Opposition to Fidel Castro People associated with the assassination of John F. Kennedy People from Barnstable Massachusetts People from Georgetown Washington D.C. People murdered in Texas People of the Cold War People of the Congo Crisis Politicians from Boston Politicians from Brookline Massachusetts Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients Presidents of the United States Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography winners Recipients of the Navy and Marine Corps Medal Riverdale Country School alumni Space advocates Star class sailors Time Person of the Year United States government officials of the Vietnam War United States Navy personnel of World War II United States Navy officers United States Navy reservists Writers from Boston Hidden categories: Source attribution CS1 Japanese-language sources ja All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links Articles with dead external links from May 2020 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia extended-confirmed-protected pages Use American English from August 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from September 2024 Articles with hAudio microformats Pages using Sister project links with wikidata mismatch People appearing on C-SPAN Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles with Curlie links Articles with Project Gutenberg links S-bef: before parameter includes the word unknown Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 13 October 2024 at 01:50 UTC . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view