Leonardo da Vinci - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Donate Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life 14521472 1.1.1 Birth and background 1.1.2 Verrocchios workshop 1.2 First Florentine period 1472c. 1482 1.3 First Milanese period c. 14821499 1.4 Second Florentine period 15001508 1.5 Second Milanese period 15081513 1.6 Rome and France 15131519 1.6.1 Death 2 Personal life 3 Paintings Toggle Paintings subsection 3.1 Early works 3.2 Paintings of the 1480s 3.3 Paintings of the 1490s 3.4 Paintings of the 1500s 4 Drawings 5 Journals and notes 6 Science and inventions Toggle Science and inventions subsection 6.1 Anatomy and physiology 6.2 Engineering and inventions 7 Legacy 8 Location of remains 9 Notes 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Citations 10.2 Works cited 10.2.1 Early 10.2.2 Modern 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Leonardo da Vinci 236 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch Aragones Armaneashti Asturianu Avanee Aymar aru Azrbaycanca Basa Bali Ban-lam-gu Basa Banyumasan Bikol Central Bislama Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Catala Cebuano Cestina Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa ChiTumbuka Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Davvisamegiella Deutsch Eesti Emilian e rumagnol Espanol Esperanto Estremenu Euskara Fiji Hindi Froyskt Francais Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gaidhlig Galego Goychi Konknni Hak-ka-ngi Hausa Hawaii Hrvatski Bahasa Hulontalo Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua IsiXhosa IsiZulu Islenska Italiano Jawa Kaby Kapampangan - Kernowek Kiswahili Kotava Kreyol ayisyen Kriyol gwiyannen Kurdi Ladin Ladino Latina Latviesu Letzebuergesch Lietuviu Ligure Limburgs Lingala Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala La .lojban. Lombard Magyar Malagasy Malti Maori Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Ming-deng-ngu Mirandes Nahuatl Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies Napulitano Nordfriisk Norsk bokmal Norsk nynorsk Novial Occitan Oromoo Ozbekcha Palzisch Patois Picard Piemonteis Plattduutsch Polski Portugues Qaraqalpaqsha Qrmtatarca Ripoarisch Romana Runa Simi Sakizaya Sardu Scots Seeltersk Sesotho sa Leboa Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovencina Slovenscina Slunski Soomaaliga Sranantongo srpski Srpskohrvatski Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog Taclhit Taqbaylit Tarandine tatarca Tetun Turkce Turkmence Tyap Uyghurche Veneto Vepsan kel Tieng Viet Volapuk Voro West-Vlams Winaray Yoruba Zazaki Zeeuws Zemaiteska Betawi Batak Mandailing Tolsi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Italian Renaissance polymath 14521519 Da Vinci redirects here. For other uses see Da Vinci disambiguation and Leonardo da Vinci disambiguation . In this Renaissance Florentine name the name da Vinci is an indicator of birthplace not a family name ; the person is properly referred to by the given name Leonardo . Leonardo da Vinci This portrait attributed to Francesco Melzi c. 15151518 is the only certain contemporary depiction of Leonardo. 1 2 Born Leonardo di ser Piero da Vinci 1452-04-15 15 April 1452 possibly Anchiano a Vinci Republic of Florence Died 2 May 1519 1519-05-02 aged 67 Clos Luce Amboise Kingdom of France Resting place Chateau dAmboise Education Studio of Andrea del Verrocchio Years active c. 14701519 Known for Painting drawing engineering anatomical studies hydrology botany optics geology Notable work Virgin of the Rocks c. 14831493 Lady with an Ermine c. 14891491 The Vitruvian Man c. 1490 The Last Supper c. 14951498 Mona Lisa c. 15031516 Movement High Renaissance Family Da Vinci family Signature Leonardo di ser Piero da Vinci b 15 April 1452 2 May 1519 was an Italian polymath of the High Renaissance who was active as a painter draughtsman engineer scientist theorist sculptor and architect. 3 While his fame initially rested on his achievements as a painter he has also become known for his notebooks in which he made drawings and notes on a variety of subjects including anatomy astronomy botany cartography painting and palaeontology . Leonardo is widely regarded to have been a genius who epitomised the Renaissance humanist ideal 4 and his collective works comprise a contribution to later generations of artists matched only by that of his younger contemporary Michelangelo . 3 4 Born out of wedlock to a successful notary and a lower-class woman in or near Vinci he was educated in Florence by the Italian painter and sculptor Andrea del Verrocchio . He began his career in the city but then spent much time in the service of Ludovico Sforza in Milan. Later he worked in Florence and Milan again as well as briefly in Rome all while attracting a large following of imitators and students. Upon the invitation of Francis I he spent his last three years in France where he died in 1519. Since his death there has not been a time where his achievements diverse interests personal life and empirical thinking have failed to incite interest and admiration 3 4 making him a frequent namesake and subject in culture . Leonardo is identified as one of the greatest painters in the history of Western art and is often credited as the founder of the High Renaissance. 3 Despite having many lost works and fewer than 25 attributed major works including numerous unfinished works he created some of the most influential paintings in the Western canon . 3 The Mona Lisa is his best known work and is the worlds most famous individual painting. The Last Supper is the most reproduced religious painting of all time and his Vitruvian Man drawing is also regarded as a cultural icon. In 2017 Salvator Mundi attributed in whole or part to Leonardo 5 was sold at auction for US450.3 million setting a new record for the most expensive painting ever sold at public auction. Revered for his technological ingenuity he conceptualised flying machines a type of armoured fighting vehicle concentrated solar power a ratio machine that could be used in an adding machine 6 7 and the double hull . Relatively few of his designs were constructed or were even feasible during his lifetime as the modern scientific approaches to metallurgy and engineering were only in their infancy during the Renaissance . Some of his smaller inventions however entered the world of manufacturing unheralded such as an automated bobbin winder and a machine for testing the tensile strength of wire. He made substantial discoveries in anatomy civil engineering hydrodynamics geology optics and tribology but he did not publish his findings and they had little to no direct influence on subsequent science. 8 Biography Early life 14521472 Birth and background Leonardo Da Vincis baptism record Leonardo da Vinci properly named Leonardo di ser Piero da Vinci b Leonardo son of ser Piero from Vinci 9 10 c was born on 15 April 1452 in or close to the Tuscan hill town of Vinci 20 miles from Florence . 11 12 d He was born out of wedlock to Piero da Vinci Ser Piero da Vinci dAntonio di ser Piero di ser Guido; 14261504 16 a Florentine legal notary 11 and Caterina di Meo Lippi c. 14341494 from the lower class. 17 18 e It remains uncertain where Leonardo was born; the traditional account from a local oral tradition recorded by the historian Emanuele Repetti 21 is that he was born in Anchiano a country hamlet that would have offered sufficient privacy for the illegitimate birth though it is still possible he was born in a house in Florence that Ser Piero almost certainly had. 22 a Leonardos parents both married separately the year after his birth. Caterina who later appears in Leonardos notes as only Caterina or Catelina is usually identified as the Caterina Buti del Vacca who married the local artisan Antonio di Piero Buti del Vacca nicknamed LAccattabriga the quarrelsome one. 17 21 Ser Piero married Albiera Amadori having been betrothed to her the previous year and after her death in 1464 went on to have three subsequent marriages. 21 23 f From all the marriages Leonardo eventually had 16 half-siblings of whom 11 survived infancy 24 who were much younger than he the last was born when Leonardo was 46 years old 24 and with whom he had very little contact. g The possible birthplace and childhood home of Leonardo in Anchiano Vinci Italy Very little is known about Leonardos childhood and much is shrouded in myth partially because of his biography in the frequently apocryphal Lives of the Most Excellent Painters Sculptors and Architects 1550 by 16th-century art historian Giorgio Vasari . 27 28 Tax records indicate that by at least 1457 he lived in the household of his paternal grandfather Antonio da Vinci 11 but it is possible that he spent the years before then in the care of his mother in Vinci either Anchiano or Campo Zeppi in the parish of San Pantaleone. 29 30 He is thought to have been close to his uncle Francesco da Vinci 3 but his father was probably in Florence most of the time. 11 Ser Piero who was the descendant of a long line of notaries established an official residence in Florence by at least 1469 and had a successful career. 11 Despite his family history Leonardo only received a basic and informal education in vernacular writing reading and mathematics; possibly because his artistic talents were recognised early so his family decided to focus their attention there. 11 Later in life Leonardo recorded his earliest memory now in the Codex Atlanticus . 31 While writing on the flight of birds he recalled as an infant when a kite came to his cradle and opened his mouth with its tail; commentators still debate whether the anecdote was an actual memory or a fantasy. 32 Verrocchios workshop The Baptism of Christ 14721475 by Verrocchio and Leonardo Uffizi Gallery In the mid-1460s Leonardos family moved to Florence which at the time was the centre of Christian Humanist thought and culture. 33 Around the age of 14 25 he became a garzone studio boy in the workshop of Andrea del Verrocchio who was the leading Florentine painter and sculptor of his time. 33 This was about the time of the death of Verrocchios master the great sculptor Donatello . h Leonardo became an apprentice by the age of 17 and remained in training for seven years. 35 Other famous painters apprenticed in the workshop or associated with it include Ghirlandaio Perugino Botticelli and Lorenzo di Credi . 36 37 Leonardo was exposed to both theoretical training and a wide range of technical skills 38 including drafting chemistry metallurgy metal working plaster casting leather working mechanics and woodwork as well as the artistic skills of drawing painting sculpting and modelling. 39 i Leonardo was a contemporary of Botticelli Ghirlandaio and Perugino who were all slightly older than he was. 40 He would have met them at the workshop of Verrocchio or at the Platonic Academy of the Medici . 36 Florence was ornamented by the works of artists such as Donatellos contemporaries Masaccio whose figurative frescoes were imbued with realism and emotion and Ghiberti whose Gates of Paradise gleaming with gold leaf displayed the art of combining complex figure compositions with detailed architectural backgrounds. Piero della Francesca had made a detailed study of perspective 41 and was the first painter to make a scientific study of light. These studies and Leon Battista Alberti s treatise De pictura were to have a profound effect on younger artists and in particular on Leonardos own observations and artworks. 34 42 Much of the painting in Verrocchios workshop was done by his assistants. According to Vasari Leonardo collaborated with Verrocchio on his The Baptism of Christ c. 14721475 painting the young angel holding Jesuss robe with skill so far superior to his masters that Verrocchio purportedly put down his brush and never painted again 1 the latter claim probably being apocryphal. 14 The new technique of oil paint was applied to areas of the mostly tempera work including the landscape the rocks seen through the brown mountain stream and much of Jesuss figure indicating Leonardos hand. 43 Additionally Leonardo may have been a model for two works by Verrocchio: the bronze statue of David in the Bargello and the archangel Raphael in Tobias and the Angel . 14 Vasari tells a story of Leonardo as a very young man: a local peasant made himself a round buckler shield and requested that Ser Piero have it painted for him. Leonardo inspired by the story of Medusa responded with a painting of a monster spitting fire that was so terrifying that his father bought a different shield to give to the peasant and sold Leonardos to a Florentine art dealer for 100 ducats who in turn sold it to the Duke of Milan . 2 First Florentine period 1472c. 1482 Adoration of the Magi c. 14781482 d 1 Uffizi Florence By 1472 at the age of 20 Leonardo qualified as a master in the Guild of Saint Luke the guild of artists and doctors of medicine j but even after his father set him up in his own workshop his attachment to Verrocchio was such that he continued to collaborate and live with him. 36 44 Leonardos earliest known dated work is a 1473 pen-and-ink drawing of the Arno valley see below. 37 45 k According to Vasari the young Leonardo was the first to suggest making the Arno river a navigable channel between Florence and Pisa . 46 In January 1478 Leonardo received an independent commission to paint an altarpiece for the Chapel of Saint Bernard in the Palazzo Vecchio 47 an indication of his independence from Verrocchios studio. An anonymous early biographer known as Anonimo Gaddiano claims that in 1480 Leonardo was living with the Medici and often worked in the garden of the Piazza San Marco Florence where a Neoplatonic academy of artists poets and philosophers organised by the Medici met. 14 l In March 1481 he received a commission from the monks of San Donato in Scopeto for The Adoration of the Magi . 48 Neither of these initial commissions were completed being abandoned when Leonardo went to offer his services to Duke of Milan Ludovico Sforza . Leonardo wrote Sforza a letter which described the diverse things that he could achieve in the fields of engineering and weapon design and mentioned that he could paint. 37 49 He brought with him a silver string instrument either a lute or lyre in the form of a horses head. 49 With Alberti Leonardo visited the home of the Medici and through them came to know the older Humanist philosophers of whom Marsiglio Ficino proponent of Neoplatonism ; Cristoforo Landino writer of commentaries on Classical writings and John Argyropoulos teacher of Greek and translator of Aristotle were the foremost. Also associated with the Platonic Academy of the Medici was Leonardos contemporary the brilliant young poet and philosopher Pico della Mirandola . 40 42 50 In 1482 Leonardo was sent as an ambassador by Lorenzo de Medici to Ludovico il Moro who ruled Milan between 1479 and 1499. 40 14 Madonna of the Carnation c. 14721478 Alte Pinakothek Munich Landscape of the Arno Valley 1473 Ginevra de Benci c. 14741480 National Gallery of Art Washington D.C. Benois Madonna c. 14781481 Hermitage Saint Petersburg Sketch of the hanging of Bernardo Bandini Baroncelli 1479 First Milanese period c. 14821499 Virgin of the Rocks c. 14831493 d 2 Louvre version Leonardo worked in Milan from 1482 until 1499. He was commissioned to paint the Virgin of the Rocks for the Confraternity of the Immaculate Conception and The Last Supper for the monastery of Santa Maria delle Grazie . 51 In the spring of 1485 Leonardo travelled to Hungary on behalf of Sforza to meet king Matthias Corvinus and was commissioned by him to paint a Madonna . 52 In 1490 he was called as a consultant together with Francesco di Giorgio Martini for the building site of the cathedral of Pavia 53 54 and was struck by the equestrian statue of Regisole of which he left a sketch. 55 Leonardo was employed on many other projects for Sforza such as preparation of floats and pageants for special occasions; a drawing of and wooden model for a competition to design the cupola for Milan Cathedral ; 56 and a model for a huge equestrian monument to Ludovicos predecessor Francesco Sforza . This would have surpassed in size the only two large equestrian statues of the Renaissance Donatello s Gattamelata in Padua and Verrocchios Bartolomeo Colleoni in Venice and became known as the Gran Cavallo . 37 Leonardo completed a model for the horse and made detailed plans for its casting 37 but in November 1494 Ludovico gave the metal to his brother-in-law to be used for a cannon to defend the city from Charles VIII of France . 37 Contemporary correspondence records that Leonardo and his assistants were commissioned by the Duke of Milan to paint the Sala delle Asse in the Sforza Castle c. 1498. 57 The project became a trompe-lil decoration that made the great hall appear to be a pergola created by the interwoven limbs of sixteen mulberry trees 58 whose canopy included an intricate labyrinth of leaves and knots on the ceiling. 59 Head of a Woman c. 14831485 Royal Library of Turin Portrait of a Musician c. 14831487 Pinacoteca Ambrosiana Milan The Vitruvian Man c. 1485 Accademia Venice Leonardos horse in silverpoint c. 1488 60 La Belle Ferronniere c. 14901498 Detail of 1902 restoration trompe-lil painting 1498 Second Florentine period 15001508 The Virgin and Child with Saint Anne and Saint John the Baptist c. 14991508 National Gallery London When Ludovico Sforza was overthrown by France in 1500 Leonardo fled Milan for Venice accompanied by his assistant Salai and friend the mathematician Luca Pacioli . 61 In Venice Leonardo was employed as a military architect and engineer devising methods to defend the city from naval attack. 36 On his return to Florence in 1500 he and his household were guests of the Servite monks at the monastery of Santissima Annunziata and were provided with a workshop where according to Vasari Leonardo created the cartoon of The Virgin and Child with Saint Anne and Saint John the Baptist a work that won such admiration that men and women young and old flocked to see it as if they were going to a solemn festival. 3 m In Cesena in 1502 Leonardo entered the service of Cesare Borgia the son of Pope Alexander VI acting as a military architect and engineer and travelling throughout Italy with his patron. 61 Leonardo created a map of Cesare Borgias stronghold a town plan of Imola in order to win his patronage. Upon seeing it Cesare hired Leonardo as his chief military engineer and architect. Later in the year Leonardo produced another map for his patron one of Chiana Valley Tuscany so as to give his patron a better overlay of the land and greater strategic position. He created this map in conjunction with his other project of constructing a dam from the sea to Florence in order to allow a supply of water to sustain the canal during all seasons. Leonardo had left Borgias service and returned to Florence by early 1503 63 where he rejoined the Guild of Saint Luke on 18 October of that year. By this same month Leonardo had begun working on a portrait of Lisa del Giocondo the model for the Mona Lisa 64 65 which he would continue working on until his twilight years. In January 1504 he was part of a committee formed to recommend where Michelangelos statue of David should be placed. 66 He then spent two years in Florence designing and painting a mural of The Battle of Anghiari for the Signoria 61 with Michelangelo designing its companion piece The Battle of Cascina . n In 1506 Leonardo was summoned to Milan by Charles II dAmboise the acting French governor of the city. 69 There Leonardo took on another pupil Count Francesco Melzi the son of a Lombard aristocrat who is considered to have been his favourite student. 36 The Council of Florence wished Leonardo to return promptly to finish The Battle of Anghiari but he was given leave at the behest of Louis XII who considered commissioning the artist to make some portraits. 69 Leonardo may have commenced a project for an equestrian figure of dAmboise; 70 a wax model survives and if genuine is the only extant example of Leonardos sculpture. Leonardo was otherwise free to pursue his scientific interests. 69 Many of Leonardos most prominent pupils either knew or worked with him in Milan 36 including Bernardino Luini Giovanni Antonio Boltraffio and Marco dOggiono . In 1507 Leonardo was in Florence sorting out a dispute with his brothers over the estate of his father who had died in 1504. The Virgin and Child with Saint Anne c. 15011519 Louvre Paris Leonardos map of Imola created for Cesare Borgia 1502 Study for The Battle of Anghiari now lost c. 1503 Museum of Fine Arts Budapest La Scapigliata c. 15061508 unfinished Galleria Nazionale di Parma Parma Study for Leda and the Swan now lost c. 15061508 Chatsworth House England Second Milanese period 15081513 By 1508 Leonardo was back in Milan living in his own house in Porta Orientale in the parish of Santa Babila. 71 In 1512 Leonardo was working on plans for an equestrian monument for Gian Giacomo Trivulzio but this was prevented by an invasion of a confederation of Swiss Spanish and Venetian forces which drove the French from Milan. Leonardo stayed in the city spending several months in 1513 at the Medicis Vaprio dAdda villa. 72 Rome and France 15131519 An apocalyptic deluge drawn in black chalk by Leonardo near the end of his life part of a series of 10 paired with written description in his notebooks 73 In March 1513 Lorenzo de Medicis son Giovanni assumed the papacy as Leo X; Leonardo went to Rome that September where he was received by the popes brother Giuliano . 72 From September 1513 to 1516 Leonardo spent much of his time living in the Belvedere Courtyard in the Apostolic Palace where Michelangelo and Raphael were both active. 71 Leonardo was given an allowance of 33 ducats a month and according to Vasari decorated a lizard with scales dipped in quicksilver . 74 The pope gave him a painting commission of unknown subject matter but cancelled it when the artist set about developing a new kind of varnish . 74 o Leonardo became ill in what may have been the first of multiple strokes leading to his death. 74 He practised botany in the Vatican Gardens and was commissioned to make plans for the Popes proposed draining of the Pontine Marshes . 75 He also dissected cadavers making notes for a treatise on vocal cords ; 76 these he gave to an official in hopes of regaining the Popes favour but he was unsuccessful. 74 In October 1515 King Francis I of France recaptured Milan. 48 p On 21 March 1516 Antonio Maria Pallavicini the French ambassador to the Holy See received a letter sent from Lyon a week previously by the royal advisor Guillaume Gouffier seigneur de Bonnivet containing the French kings instructions to assist Leonardo in his relocation to France and to inform the artist that the King was eagerly awaiting his arrival. Pallavicini was also asked to reassure Leonardo that he would be well received at court both by the King and by his mother Louise of Savoy . 78 Leonardo entered Franciss service later that year and was given the use of the manor house Clos Luce near the Kings residence at the royal Chateau dAmboise . He was frequently visited by Francis and drew plans for an immense castle town the King intended to erect at Romorantin . He also made a mechanical lion which during a pageant walked towards the King and upon being struck by a wand opened its chest to reveal a cluster of lilies. 79 3 q Leonardo was accompanied during this time by his friend and apprentice Francesco Melzi and was supported by a pension totalling 10 000 scudi . 71 At some point Melzi drew a portrait of Leonardo ; the only others known from his lifetime were a sketch by an unknown assistant on the back of one of Leonardos studies c. 1517 81 and a drawing by Giovanni Ambrogio Figino depicting an elderly Leonardo with his right arm wrapped in clothing. 82 r The latter in addition to the record of an October 1517 visit by Louis dAragon s confirms an account of Leonardos right hand being paralytic when he was 65 85 which may indicate why he left works such as the Mona Lisa unfinished. 83 86 87 He continued to work at some capacity until eventually becoming ill and bedridden for several months. 85 Death Leonardo died at Clos Luce on 2 May 1519 at the age of 67 possibly of a stroke. 88 87 89 Francis I had become a close friend. Vasari describes Leonardo as lamenting on his deathbed full of repentance that he had offended against God and men by failing to practice his art as he should have done. 90 Vasari states that in his last days Leonardo sent for a priest to make his confession and to receive the Holy Sacrament . 4 Vasari also records that the King held Leonardos head in his arms as he died although this story may be legend rather than fact. t u In accordance with his will sixty beggars carrying tapers followed Leonardos casket. 50 v Melzi was the principal heir and executor receiving as well as money Leonardos paintings tools library and personal effects. Leonardos other long-time pupil and companion Salai and his servant Baptista de Vilanis each received half of Leonardos vineyards . 92 His brothers received land and his serving woman received a fur-lined cloak. On 12 August 1519 Leonardos remains were interred in the Collegiate Church of Saint Florentin at the Chateau dAmboise. 93 Some 20 years after Leonardos death Francis was reported by the goldsmith and sculptor Benvenuto Cellini as saying: There had never been another man born in the world who knew as much as Leonardo not so much about painting sculpture and architecture as that he was a very great philosopher. 94 Drawing of the Chateau dAmboise c. 1518 attributed to Francesco Melzi Salai or Il Salaino The Little Unclean One i.e. the devil entered Leonardos household in 1490 as an assistant. After only a year Leonardo made a list of his misdemeanours calling him a thief a liar stubborn and a glutton after he had made off with money and valuables on at least five occasions and spent a fortune on clothes. 95 Nevertheless Leonardo treated him with great indulgence and he remained in Leonardos household for the next thirty years. 96 Salai executed a number of paintings under the name of Andrea Salai but although Vasari claims that Leonardo taught him many things about painting 3 his work is generally considered to be of less artistic merit than others among Leonardos pupils such as Marco dOggiono and Boltraffio . At the time of his death in 1524 Salai owned a painting referred to as Joconda in a posthumous inventory of his belongings; it was assessed at 505 lire an exceptionally high valuation for a small panel portrait. 97 Personal life Main article: Personal life of Leonardo da Vinci Saint John the Baptist c. 15071516 d 3 Louvre. Leonardo is thought to have used Salai as the model. 98 Despite the thousands of pages Leonardo left in notebooks and manuscripts he scarcely made reference to his personal life. 2 Within Leonardos lifetime his extraordinary powers of invention his great physical beauty and infinite grace as described by Vasari 5 as well as all other aspects of his life attracted the curiosity of others. One such aspect was his love for animals likely including vegetarianism and according to Vasari a habit of purchasing caged birds and releasing them. 99 6 Leonardo had many friends who are now notable either in their fields or for their historical significance including mathematician Luca Pacioli 100 with whom he collaborated on the book Divina proportione in the 1490s. Leonardo appears to have had no close relationships with women except for his friendship with Cecilia Gallerani and the two Este sisters Beatrice and Isabella . 101 While on a journey that took him through Mantua he drew a portrait of Isabella that appears to have been used to create a painted portrait now lost. 36 Beyond friendship Leonardo kept his private life secret. His sexuality has been the subject of satire analysis and speculation. This trend began in the mid-16th century and was revived in the 19th and 20th centuries most notably by Sigmund Freud in his Leonardo da Vinci A Memory of His Childhood . 102 Leonardos most intimate relationships were perhaps with his pupils Salai and Melzi . Melzi writing to inform Leonardos brothers of his death described Leonardos feelings for his pupils as both loving and passionate. It has been claimed since the 16th century that these relationships were of a sexual or erotic nature. Walter Isaacson in his biography of Leonardo makes explicit his opinion that the relations with Salai were intimate and homosexual. 103 Earlier in Leonardos life court records of 1476 when he was aged twenty-four show that Leonardo and three other young men were charged with sodomy in an incident involving a known male prostitute. The charges were dismissed for lack of evidence and there is speculation that since one of the accused Lionardo de Tornabuoni was related to Lorenzo de Medici the family exerted its influence to secure the dismissal. 104 Since that date much has been written about his presumed homosexuality 105 and its role in his art particularly in the androgyny and eroticism manifested in Saint John the Baptist and Bacchus and more explicitly in a number of erotic drawings. 106 98 Paintings See also: List of works by Leonardo da Vinci Despite the recent awareness and admiration of Leonardo as a scientist and inventor for the better part of four hundred years his fame rested on his achievements as a painter. A handful of works that are either authenticated or attributed to him have been regarded as among the great masterpieces. These paintings are famous for a variety of qualities that have been much imitated by students and discussed at great length by connoisseurs and critics. By the 1490s Leonardo had already been described as a Divine painter. 107 Among the qualities that make Leonardos work unique are his innovative techniques for laying on the paint; his detailed knowledge of anatomy light botany and geology; his interest in physiognomy and the way humans register emotion in expression and gesture; his innovative use of the human form in figurative composition; and his use of subtle gradation of tone. All these qualities come together in his most famous painted works the Mona Lisa the Last Supper and the Virgin of the Rocks . w Early works Annunciation c. 14721476 d 4 Uffizi is thought to be Leonardos earliest extant and complete major work. Leonardo first gained attention for his work on the Baptism of Christ painted in conjunction with Verrocchio. Two other paintings appear to date from his time at Verrocchios workshop both of which are Annunciations . One is small 59 centimetres 23 in long and 14 cm 5.5 in high. It is a predella to go at the base of a larger composition a painting by Lorenzo di Credi from which it has become separated. The other is a much larger work 217 cm 85 in long. 108 In both Annunciations Leonardo used a formal arrangement like two well-known pictures by Fra Angelico of the same subject of the Virgin Mary sitting or kneeling to the right of the picture approached from the left by an angel in profile with a rich flowing garment raised wings and bearing a lily. Although previously attributed to Ghirlandaio the larger work is now generally attributed to Leonardo. 109 In the smaller painting Mary averts her eyes and folds her hands in a gesture that symbolised submission to Gods will. Mary is not submissive however in the larger piece. The girl interrupted in her reading by this unexpected messenger puts a finger in her bible to mark the place and raises her hand in a formal gesture of greeting or surprise. 34 This calm young woman appears to accept her role as the Mother of God not with resignation but with confidence. In this painting the young Leonardo presents the humanist face of the Virgin Mary recognising humanitys role in Gods incarnation. Paintings of the 1480s Saint Jerome in the Wilderness unfinished c. 14801490 d 5 Vatican In the 1480s Leonardo received two very important commissions and commenced another work that was of ground-breaking importance in terms of composition. Two of the three were never finished and the third took so long that it was subject to lengthy negotiations over completion and payment. One of these paintings was Saint Jerome in the Wilderness which Bortolon associates with a difficult period of Leonardos life as evidenced in his diary: I thought I was learning to live; I was only learning to die. 36 Although the painting is barely begun the composition can be seen and is very unusual. x Jerome as a penitent occupies the middle of the picture set on a slight diagonal and viewed somewhat from above. His kneeling form takes on a trapezoid shape with one arm stretched to the outer edge of the painting and his gaze looking in the opposite direction. J. Wasserman points out the link between this painting and Leonardos anatomical studies. 110 Across the foreground sprawls his symbol a great lion whose body and tail make a double spiral across the base of the picture space. The other remarkable feature is the sketchy landscape of craggy rocks against which the figure is silhouetted. The daring display of figure composition the landscape elements and personal drama also appear in the great unfinished masterpiece the Adoration of the Magi a commission from the Monks of San Donato a Scopeto. It is a complex composition of about 250 x 250 centimetres. Leonardo did numerous drawings and preparatory studies including a detailed one in linear perspective of the ruined classical architecture that forms part of the background. In 1482 Leonardo went to Milan at the behest of Lorenzo de Medici in order to win favour with Ludovico il Moro and the painting was abandoned. 14 Lady with an Ermine c. 14891491 d 6 Czartoryski Museum Krakow Poland The third important work of this period is the Virgin of the Rocks commissioned in Milan for the Confraternity of the Immaculate Conception. The painting to be done with the assistance of the de Predis brothers was to fill a large complex altarpiece . 111 Leonardo chose to paint an apocryphal moment of the infancy of Christ when the infant John the Baptist in protection of an angel met the Holy Family on the road to Egypt. The painting demonstrates an eerie beauty as the graceful figures kneel in adoration around the infant Christ in a wild landscape of tumbling rock and whirling water. 112 While the painting is quite large about 200120 centimetres it is not nearly as complex as the painting ordered by the monks of San Donato having only four figures rather than about fifty and a rocky landscape rather than architectural details. The painting was eventually finished; in fact two versions of the painting were finished: one remained at the chapel of the Confraternity while Leonardo took the other to France. The Brothers did not get their painting however nor the de Predis their payment until the next century. 37 61 Leonardos most remarkable portrait of this period is the Lady with an Ermine presumed to be Cecilia Gallerani c. 14831490 lover of Ludovico Sforza. 113 114 The painting is characterised by the pose of the figure with the head turned at a very different angle to the torso unusual at a date when many portraits were still rigidly in profile. The ermine plainly carries symbolic meaning relating either to the sitter or to Ludovico who belonged to the prestigious Order of the Ermine . 113 Paintings of the 1490s The Last Supper d 7 Convent of Santa Maria delle Grazie Milan c. 14921498 Leonardos most famous painting of the 1490s is The Last Supper commissioned for the refectory of the Convent of Santa Maria della Grazie in Milan. It represents the last meal shared by Jesus with his disciples before his capture and death and shows the moment when Jesus has just said one of you will betray me and the consternation that this statement caused. 37 The writer Matteo Bandello observed Leonardo at work and wrote that some days he would paint from dawn till dusk without stopping to eat and then not paint for three or four days at a time. 115 This was beyond the comprehension of the prior of the convent who hounded him until Leonardo asked Ludovico to intervene. Vasari describes how Leonardo troubled over his ability to adequately depict the faces of Christ and the traitor Judas told the duke that he might be obliged to use the prior as his model. 7 The painting was acclaimed as a masterpiece of design and characterisation 8 but it deteriorated rapidly so that within a hundred years it was described by one viewer as completely ruined. 116 Leonardo instead of using the reliable technique of fresco had used tempera over a ground that was mainly gesso resulting in a surface subject to mould and to flaking. 117 Despite this the painting remains one of the most reproduced works of art; countless copies have been made in various mediums. Toward the end of this period in 1498 Leonardos trompe-lil decoration of the Sala delle Asse was painted for the Duke of Milan in the Castello Sforzesco . Paintings of the 1500s In 1505 Leonardo was commissioned to paint The Battle of Anghiari in the Salone dei Cinquecento Hall of the Five Hundred in the Palazzo Vecchio Florence. Leonardo devised a dynamic composition depicting four men riding raging war horses engaged in a battle for possession of a standard at the Battle of Anghiari in 1440. Michelangelo was assigned the opposite wall to depict the Battle of Cascina . Leonardos painting deteriorated rapidly and is now known from a copy by Rubens . 118 Mona Lisa or La Gioconda c. 15031516 d 8 Louvre Paris Among the works created by Leonardo in the 16th century is the small portrait known as the Mona Lisa or La Gioconda the laughing one. In the present era it is arguably the most famous painting in the world. Its fame rests in particular on the elusive smile on the womans face its mysterious quality perhaps due to the subtly shadowed corners of the mouth and eyes such that the exact nature of the smile cannot be determined. The shadowy quality for which the work is renowned came to be called sfumato or Leonardos smoke. Vasari wrote that the smile was so pleasing that it seems more divine than human and it was considered a wondrous thing that it was as lively as the smile of the living original. 9 Other characteristics of the painting are the unadorned dress in which the eyes and hands have no competition from other details; the dramatic landscape background in which the world seems to be in a state of flux; the subdued colouring; and the extremely smooth nature of the painterly technique employing oils laid on much like tempera and blended on the surface so that the brushstrokes are indistinguishable. 119 Vasari expressed that the paintings quality would make even the most confident master ... despair and lose heart. 10 The perfect state of preservation and the fact that there is no sign of repair or overpainting is rare in a panel painting of this date. 120 In the painting Virgin and Child with Saint Anne the composition again picks up the theme of figures in a landscape which Wasserman describes as breathtakingly beautiful 121 and harkens back to the Saint Jerome with the figure set at an oblique angle. What makes this painting unusual is that there are two obliquely set figures superimposed. Mary is seated on the knee of her mother Saint Anne. She leans forward to restrain the Christ Child as he plays roughly with a lamb the sign of his own impending sacrifice. 37 This painting which was copied many times influenced Michelangelo Raphael and Andrea del Sarto 122 and through them Pontormo and Correggio . The trends in composition were adopted in particular by the Venetian painters Tintoretto and Veronese . Drawings Antique Warrior in Profile c. 1472 . British Museum London Presumed self-portrait of Leonardo c. 1510 at the Royal Library of Turin Italy Leonardo was a prolific draughtsman keeping journals full of small sketches and detailed drawings recording all manner of things that took his attention. As well as the journals there exist many studies for paintings some of which can be identified as preparatory to particular works such as The Adoration of the Magi The Virgin of the Rocks and The Last Supper . 123 His earliest dated drawing is a Landscape of the Arno Valley 1473 which shows the river the mountains Montelupo Castle and the farmlands beyond it in great detail. 36 123 y Among his famous drawings are the Vitruvian Man a study of the proportions of the human body; the Head of an Angel for The Virgin of the Rocks in the Louvre ; a botanical study of Star of Bethlehem ; and a large drawing 160100 cm in black chalk on coloured paper of The Virgin and Child with Saint Anne and Saint John the Baptist in the National Gallery London. 123 This drawing employs the subtle sfumato technique of shading in the manner of the Mona Lisa . It is thought that Leonardo never made a painting from it the closest similarity being to The Virgin and Child with Saint Anne in the Louvre. 124 Other drawings of interest include numerous studies generally referred to as caricatures because although exaggerated they appear to be based upon observation of live models. Vasari relates that Leonardo would look for interesting faces in public to use as models for some of his work. 7 There are numerous studies of beautiful young men often associated with Salai with the rare and much admired facial feature the so-called Grecian profile . z These faces are often contrasted with that of a warrior. 123 Salai is often depicted in fancy-dress costume. Leonardo is known to have designed sets for pageants with which these may be associated. Other often meticulous drawings show studies of drapery. A marked development in Leonardos ability to draw drapery occurred in his early works. Another often-reproduced drawing is a macabre sketch that was done by Leonardo in Florence in 1479 showing the body of Bernardo Baroncelli hanged in connection with the murder of Giuliano brother of Lorenzo de Medici in the Pazzi conspiracy . 123 In his notes Leonardo recorded the colours of the robes that Baroncelli was wearing when he died. Like the two contemporary architects Donato Bramante who designed the Belvedere Courtyard and Antonio da Sangallo the Elder Leonardo experimented with designs for centrally planned churches a number of which appear in his journals as both plans and views although none was ever realised. 40 125 Journals and notes See also: List of works by Leonardo da Vinci Manuscripts Renaissance humanism recognised no mutually exclusive polarities between the sciences and the arts and Leonardos studies in science and engineering are sometimes considered as impressive and innovative as his artistic work. 37 These studies were recorded in 13 000 pages of notes and drawings which fuse art and natural philosophy the forerunner of modern science. They were made and maintained daily throughout Leonardos life and travels as he made continual observations of the world around him. 37 Leonardos notes and drawings display an enormous range of interests and preoccupations some as mundane as lists of groceries and people who owed him money and some as intriguing as designs for wings and shoes for walking on water. There are compositions for paintings studies of details and drapery studies of faces and emotions of animals babies dissections plant studies rock formations whirlpools war machines flying machines and architecture. 37 A page showing Leonardos study of a foetus in the womb c. 1510 Royal Library Windsor Castle These notebooks originally loose papers of different types and sizes were largely entrusted to Leonardos pupil and heir Francesco Melzi after the masters death. 126 These were to be published a task of overwhelming difficulty because of its scope and Leonardos idiosyncratic writing. 127 Some of Leonardos drawings were copied by an anonymous Milanese artist for a planned treatise on art c. 1570 . 128 After Melzis death in 1570 the collection passed to his son the lawyer Orazio who initially took little interest in the journals. 126 In 1587 a Melzi household tutor named Lelio Gavardi took 13 of the manuscripts to Pisa; there the architect Giovanni Magenta reproached Gavardi for having taken the manuscripts illicitly and returned them to Orazio. Having many more such works in his possession Orazio gifted the volumes to Magenta. News spread of these lost works of Leonardos and Orazio retrieved seven of the 13 manuscripts which he then gave to Pompeo Leoni for publication in two volumes; one of these was the Codex Atlanticus . The other six works had been distributed to a few others. 129 After Orazios death his heirs sold the rest of Leonardos possessions and thus began their dispersal. 130 Some works have found their way into major collections such as the Royal Library at Windsor Castle the Louvre the Biblioteca Nacional de Espana the Victoria and Albert Museum the Biblioteca Ambrosiana in Milan which holds the 12-volume Codex Atlanticus and the British Library in London which has put a selection from the Codex Arundel BL Arundel MS 263 online. 131 Works have also been at Holkham Hall the Metropolitan Museum of Art and in the private hands of John Nicholas Brown I and Robert Lehman . 126 The Codex Leicester is the only privately owned major scientific work of Leonardo; it is owned by Bill Gates and displayed once a year in different cities around the world. Most of Leonardos writings are in mirror-image cursive. 45 132 Since Leonardo wrote with his left hand it was probably easier for him to write from right to left. 133 aa Leonardo used a variety of shorthand and symbols and states in his notes that he intended to prepare them for publication. 132 In many cases a single topic is covered in detail in both words and pictures on a single sheet together conveying information that would not be lost if the pages were published out of order. 136 Why they were not published during Leonardos lifetime is unknown. 37 Science and inventions Main article: Science and inventions of Leonardo da Vinci Rhombicuboctahedron as published in Paciolis Divina proportione 1509 Leonardos approach to science was observational: he tried to understand a phenomenon by describing and depicting it in utmost detail and did not emphasise experiments or theoretical explanation. Since he lacked formal education in Latin and mathematics contemporary scholars mostly ignored Leonardo the scientist although he did teach himself Latin. His keen observations in many areas were noted such as when he wrote Il sole non si move. The Sun does not move. 137 In the 1490s he studied mathematics under Luca Pacioli and prepared a series of drawings of regular solids in a skeletal form to be engraved as plates for Paciolis book Divina proportione published in 1509. 37 While living in Milan he studied light from the summit of Monte Rosa . 69 Scientific writings in his notebook on fossils have been considered as influential on early palaeontology . 138 The content of his journals suggest that he was planning a series of treatises on a variety of subjects. A coherent treatise on anatomy is said to have been observed during a visit by Cardinal Louis dAragons secretary in 1517. 139 Aspects of his work on the studies of anatomy light and the landscape were assembled for publication by Melzi and eventually published as A Treatise on Painting in France and Italy in 1651 and Germany in 1724 140 with engravings based upon drawings by the Classical painter Nicolas Poussin . 4 According to Arasse the treatise which in France went into 62 editions in fifty years caused Leonardo to be seen as the precursor of French academic thought on art. 37 While Leonardos experimentation followed scientific methods a recent and exhaustive analysis of Leonardo as a scientist by Fritjof Capra argues that Leonardo was a fundamentally different kind of scientist from Galileo Newton and other scientists who followed him in that as a Renaissance Man his theorising and hypothesising integrated the arts and particularly painting. 141 Anatomy and physiology Anatomical study of the arm c. 1510 Leonardos physiological sketch of the human brain and skull c. 1510 Leonardo started his study in the anatomy of the human body under the apprenticeship of Verrocchio who demanded that his students develop a deep knowledge of the subject. As an artist he quickly became master of topographic anatomy drawing many studies of muscles tendons and other visible anatomical features. citation needed As a successful artist Leonardo was given permission to dissect human corpses at the Hospital of Santa Maria Nuova in Florence and later at hospitals in Milan and Rome. From 1510 to 1511 he collaborated in his studies with the doctor Marcantonio della Torre professor of Anatomy at the University of Pavia . 142 Leonardo made over 240 detailed drawings and wrote about 13 000 words toward a treatise on anatomy. 143 Only a small amount of the material on anatomy was published in Leonardos Treatise on painting . 127 During the time that Melzi was ordering the material into chapters for publication they were examined by a number of anatomists and artists including Vasari Cellini and Albrecht Durer who made a number of drawings from them. 127 Leonardos anatomical drawings include many studies of the human skeleton and its parts and of muscles and sinews. He studied the mechanical functions of the skeleton and the muscular forces that are applied to it in a manner that prefigured the modern science of biomechanics . 144 He drew the heart and vascular system the sex organs and other internal organs making one of the first scientific drawings of a fetus in utero . 123 The drawings and notation are far ahead of their time and if published would undoubtedly have made a major contribution to medical science. 143 Leonardo also closely observed and recorded the effects of age and of human emotion on the physiology studying in particular the effects of rage. He drew many figures who had significant facial deformities or signs of illness. 37 123 Leonardo also studied and drew the anatomy of many animals dissecting cows birds monkeys bears and frogs and comparing in his drawings their anatomical structure with that of humans. He also made a number of studies of horses. 123 Leonardos dissections and documentation of muscles nerves and vessels helped to describe the physiology and mechanics of movement. He attempted to identify the source of emotions and their expression. He found it difficult to incorporate the prevailing system and theories of bodily humours but eventually he abandoned these physiological explanations of bodily functions. He made the observations that humours were not located in cerebral spaces or ventricles . He documented that the humours were not contained in the heart or the liver and that it was the heart that defined the circulatory system. He was the first to define atherosclerosis and liver cirrhosis . He created models of the cerebral ventricles with the use of melted wax and constructed a glass aorta to observe the circulation of blood through the aortic valve by using water and grass seed to watch flow patterns. 145 Engineering and inventions A design for a flying machine c. 1488 first presented in the Codex on the Flight of Birds An aerial screw c. 1489 suggestive of a helicopter from the Codex Atlanticus During his lifetime Leonardo was also valued as an engineer. With the same rational and analytical approach that moved him to represent the human body and to investigate anatomy Leonardo studied and designed many machines and devices. He drew their anatomy with unparalleled mastery producing the first form of the modern technical drawing including a perfected exploded view technique to represent internal components. Those studies and projects collected in his codices fill more than 5 000 pages. 146 In a letter of 1482 to the lord of Milan Ludovico il Moro he wrote that he could create all sorts of machines both for the protection of a city and for siege. When he fled from Milan to Venice in 1499 he found employment as an engineer and devised a system of moveable barricades to protect the city from attack. In 1502 he created a scheme for diverting the flow of the Arno river a project on which Niccolo Machiavelli also worked. 147 148 He continued to contemplate the canalisation of Lombardys plains while in Louis XIIs company 69 and of the Loire and its tributaries in the company of Francis I. 149 Leonardos journals include a vast number of inventions both practical and impractical. They include musical instruments a mechanical knight hydraulic pumps reversible crank mechanisms finned mortar shells and a steam cannon . 36 37 Leonardos drawings of a scythed chariot and a fighting vehicle Leonardo was fascinated by the phenomenon of flight for much of his life producing many studies including Codex on the Flight of Birds c. 1505 as well as plans for several flying machines such as a flapping ornithopter and a machine with a helical rotor . 37 In a 2003 documentary by British television station Channel Four titled Leonardos Dream Machines various designs by Leonardo such as a parachute and a giant crossbow were interpreted and constructed. 150 151 Some of those designs proved successful whilst others fared less well when tested. Similarly a team of engineers built ten machines designed by Leonardo in the 2009 American television series Doing DaVinci including a fighting vehicle and a self-propelled cart . Research performed by Marc van den Broek revealed older prototypes for more than 100 inventions that are ascribed to Leonardo. Similarities between Leonardos illustrations and drawings from the Middle Ages and from Ancient Greece and Rome the Chinese and Persian Empires and Egypt suggest that a large portion of Leonardos inventions had been conceived before his lifetime. Leonardos innovation was to combine different functions from existing drafts and set them into scenes that illustrated their utility. By reconstituting technical inventions he created something new. 152 In his notebooks Leonardo first stated the laws of sliding friction in 1493. 153 His inspiration for investigating friction came about in part from his study of perpetual motion which he correctly concluded was not possible. 154 His results were never published and the friction laws were not rediscovered until 1699 by Guillaume Amontons with whose name they are now usually associated. 7 For this contribution Leonardo was named as the first of the 23 Men of Tribology by Duncan Dowson . 155 Legacy Further information: Cultural references to Leonardo da Vinci and List of things named after Leonardo da Vinci Statue outside the Uffizi Florence by Luigi Pampaloni 17911847 Although he had no formal academic training 156 many historians and scholars regard Leonardo as the prime exemplar of the Universal Genius or Renaissance Man an individual of unquenchable curiosity and feverishly inventive imagination. 157 He is widely considered one of the most diversely talented individuals ever to have lived. 158 According to art historian Helen Gardner the scope and depth of his interests were without precedent in recorded history and his mind and personality seem to us superhuman while the man himself mysterious and remote. 157 Scholars interpret his view of the world as being based in logic though the empirical methods he used were unorthodox for his time. 159 Leonardos fame within his own lifetime was such that the King of France carried him away like a trophy and was claimed to have supported him in his old age and held him in his arms as he died. Interest in Leonardo and his work has never diminished. Crowds still queue to see his best-known artworks T-shirts still bear his most famous drawing and writers continue to hail him as a genius while speculating about his private life as well as about what one so intelligent actually believed in. 37 The continued admiration that Leonardo commanded from painters critics and historians is reflected in many other written tributes. Baldassare Castiglione author of Il Cortegiano The Courtier wrote in 1528: ...Another of the greatest painters in this world looks down on this art in which he is unequalled... 160 while the biographer known as Anonimo Gaddiano wrote c. 1540 : His genius was so rare and universal that it can be said that nature worked a miracle on his behalf... 161 Vasari in his Lives of the Artists 1568 opens his chapter on Leonardo: 11 In the normal course of events many men and women are born with remarkable talents; but occasionally in a way that transcends nature a single person is marvellously endowed by Heaven with beauty grace and talent in such abundance that he leaves other men far behind all his actions seem inspired and indeed everything he does clearly comes from God rather than from human skill. Everyone acknowledged that this was true of Leonardo da Vinci an artist of outstanding physical beauty who displayed infinite grace in everything that he did and who cultivated his genius so brilliantly that all problems he studied he solved with ease. The Death of Leonardo da Vinci by Ingres 1818 u The 19th century brought a particular admiration for Leonardos genius causing Henry Fuseli to write in 1801: Such was the dawn of modern art when Leonardo da Vinci broke forth with a splendour that distanced former excellence: made up of all the elements that constitute the essence of genius... 162 This is echoed by A. E. Rio who wrote in 1861: He towered above all other artists through the strength and the nobility of his talents. 163 By the 19th century the scope of Leonardos notebooks was known as well as his paintings. Hippolyte Taine wrote in 1866: There may not be in the world an example of another genius so universal so incapable of fulfilment so full of yearning for the infinite so naturally refined so far ahead of his own century and the following centuries. 164 Art historian Bernard Berenson wrote in 1896: Leonardo is the one artist of whom it may be said with perfect literalness: Nothing that he touched but turned into a thing of eternal beauty. Whether it be the cross section of a skull the structure of a weed or a study of muscles he with his feeling for line and for light and shade forever transmuted it into life-communicating values. 165 The interest in Leonardos genius has continued unabated; experts study and translate his writings analyse his paintings using scientific techniques argue over attributions and search for works which have been recorded but never found. 166 Liana Bortolon writing in 1967 said: Because of the multiplicity of interests that spurred him to pursue every field of knowledge...Leonardo can be considered quite rightly to have been the universal genius par excellence and with all the disquieting overtones inherent in that term. Man is as uncomfortable today faced with a genius as he was in the 16th century. Five centuries have passed yet we still view Leonardo with awe. 36 The Elmer Belt Library of Vinciana is a special collection at the University of California Los Angeles . 167 Leonardo Museum in Vinci which houses a large collection of models constructed on the basis of Leonardos drawings Twenty-first-century author Walter Isaacson based much of his biography of Leonardo 104 on thousands of notebook entries studying the personal notes sketches budget notations and musings of the man whom he considers the greatest of innovators. Isaacson was surprised to discover a fun joyous side of Leonardo in addition to his limitless curiosity and creative genius. 168 On the 500th anniversary of Leonardos death the Louvre in Paris arranged for the largest ever single exhibit of his work called Leonardo between November 2019 and February 2020. The exhibit includes over 100 paintings drawings and notebooks. Eleven of the paintings that Leonardo completed in his lifetime were included. Five of these are owned by the Louvre but the Mona Lisa was not included because it is in such great demand among general visitors to the Louvre; it remains on display in its gallery. Vitruvian Man however is on display following a legal battle with its owner the Gallerie dellAccademia in Venice. Salvator Mundi ab was also not included because its Saudi owner did not agree to lease the work. 171 172 The Mona Lisa considered Leonardos magnum opus is often regarded as the most famous portrait ever made. 3 173 The Last Supper is the most reproduced religious painting of all time 157 and Leonardos Vitruvian Man drawing is also considered a cultural icon . 174 More than a decade of analysis of Leonardos genetic genealogy conducted by Alessandro Vezzosi and Agnese Sabato came to a conclusion in mid-2021. It was determined that the artist has 14 living male relatives. The work could also help determine the authenticity of remains thought to belong to Leonardo. 175 Location of remains Tomb in the chapel of Saint Hubert at the Chateau dAmboise where a plaque describes it as the presumed site of Leonardos remains While Leonardo was certainly buried in the collegiate church of Saint Florentin at the Chateau dAmboise in 12 August 1519 the current location of his remains is unclear. 176 177 Much of Chateau dAmboise was damaged during the French Revolution leading to the churchs demolition in 1802. 176 Some of the graves were destroyed in the process scattering the bones interred there and thereby leaving the whereabouts of Leonardos remains subject to dispute; a gardener may have even buried some in the corner of the courtyard. 176 In 1863 fine-arts inspector general Arsene Houssaye received an imperial commission to excavate the site and discovered a partially complete skeleton with a bronze ring on one finger white hair and stone fragments bearing the inscriptions EO AR DUS and VINC interpreted as forming Leonardus Vinci . 93 176 178 The skulls eight teeth correspond to someone of approximately the appropriate age and a silver shield found near the bones depicts a beardless Francis I corresponding to the kings appearance during Leonardos time in France. 178 Houssaye postulated that the unusually large skull was an indicator of Leonardos intelligence; author Charles Nicholl describes this as a dubious phrenological deduction . 176 At the same time Houssaye noted some issues with his observations including that the feet were turned toward the high altar a practice generally reserved for laymen and that the skeleton of 1.73 metres 5.7 ft seemed too short. 178 failed verification see discussion Art historian Mary Margaret Heaton wrote in 1874 that the height would be appropriate for Leonardo. 179 The skull was allegedly presented to Napoleon III before being returned to the Chateau dAmboise where they were re-interred in the chapel of Saint Hubert in 1874. 178 180 A plaque above the tomb states that its contents are only presumed to be those of Leonardo. 177 It has since been theorised that the folding of the skeletons right arm over the head may correspond to the paralysis of Leonardos right hand. 82 88 178 In 2016 it was announced that DNA tests would be conducted to determine whether the attribution is correct. 180 The DNA of the remains will be compared to that of samples collected from Leonardos work and his half-brother Domenicos descendants; 180 it may also be sequenced . 181 In 2019 documents were published revealing that Houssaye had kept the ring and a lock of hair. In 1925 his great-grandson sold these to an American collector. Sixty years later another American acquired them leading to their being displayed at the Leonardo Museum in Vinci beginning on 2 May 2019 the 500th anniversary of the artists death. 93 182 Notes General a b See Nicholl 2005 pp. 1720 and Bambach 2019 p. 24 for further information on the dispute and uncertainty surrounding Leonardos exact birthplace. a b l i n r d o d v n t i l i o - l e o - LEE -- NAR -doh d VIN -chee LEE -oh- LAY -oh- ; Italian: leonardo di sr pjro da vvinti i . The inclusion of the title ser shortening of Italian messer or messere title of courtesy prefixed to the first name indicates that Leonardos father was a gentleman a low-ranking nobleman. The diary of his paternal grandfather Ser Antonio relays a precise account: There was born to me a grandson son of Ser Piero fr on 15 April a Saturday at the third hour of the night. 13 14 Ser Antonio records Leonardo being baptised the following day by Piero di Bartolomeo at the parish of Santa Croce it . 15 It has been suggested that Caterina may have been a slave from the Middle East or at least from the Mediterranean or even of Chinese descent. According to art critic Alessandro Vezzosi head of the Leonardo Museum in Vinci there is evidence that Piero owned a slave called Caterina. 19 The reconstruction of one of Leonardos fingerprints shows a pattern that matches 60 of people of Middle Eastern origin suggesting the possibility that Leonardo may have had Middle Eastern blood. The claim is refuted by Simon Cole associate professor of criminology law and society at the University of California at Irvine: You cant predict one persons race from these kinds of incidences especially if looking at only one finger . More recently historian Martin Kemp after digging through overlooked archives and records in Italy found evidence that Leonardos mother was a young local woman identified as Caterina di Meo Lippi. 20 See Kemp Pallanti 2017 pp. 6566 for detailed table on Ser Pieros marriages. He also never wrote about his father except a passing note of his death in which he overstates his age by three years. 25 Leonardos siblings caused him difficulty after his fathers death in a dispute over their inheritance. 26 The humanist influence of Donatellos David can be seen in Leonardos late paintings particularly John the Baptist . 34 33 The diverse arts and technical skills of Medieval and Renaissance workshops are described in detail in the 12th-century text On Divers Arts by Theophilus Presbyter and in the early 15th-century text Il Libro Dellarte O Trattato Della Pittui by Cennino Cennini . That Leonardo joined the guild by this time is deduced from the record of payment made to the Compagnia di San Luca in the companys register Libro Rosso A 14721520 Accademia di Belle Arti. 14 On the back he wrote: I staying with Anthony am happy possibly in reference to his father. Leonardo later wrote in the margin of a journal The Medici made me and the Medici destroyed me. 36 In 2005 the studio was rediscovered during the restoration of part of a building occupied for 100 years by the Department of Military Geography. 62 Both works are lost. The entire composition of Michelangelos painting is known from a copy by Aristotole da Sangallo 1542. 67 Leonardos painting is known only from preparatory sketches and several copies of the centre section of which the best known and probably least accurate is by Peter Paul Rubens . 68 Pope Leo X is quoted as saying This man will never accomplish anything! He thinks of the end before the beginning! 74 There is no documentary basis for the frequently made claim that Leonardo was present at the meeting between Francis I and Leo X which took place in Bologna from 11 to 14 December 1516. 77 It is unknown for what occasion the mechanical lion was made but it is believed to have greeted the King at his entry into Lyon and perhaps was used for the peace talks between the French king and Pope Leo X in Bologna. A conjectural recreation of the lion has been made and is on display in the Museum of Bologna. 80 Identified via its similarity to Leonardos presumed self-portrait . 83 ... Messer Lunardo Vinci sic ... an old graybeard of more than 70 years ... showed His Excellency three pictures ... from whom since he was then subject to a certain paralysis of the right hand one could not expect any more good work. 84 This scene is portrayed in romantic paintings by Ingres Menageot and other French artists as well as Angelica Kauffman . a b On the day of Leonardos death a royal edict was issued by the King at Saint-Germain-en-Laye a two-day journey from Clos Luce. This has been taken as evidence that King Francis cannot have been present at Leonardos deathbed but the edict was not signed by the King. 91 Each of the sixty paupers were to have been awarded in accord with Leonardos will. 50 These qualities of Leonardos works are discussed in Hartt 1970 pp. 387411 The painting which in the 18th century belonged to Angelica Kauffman was later cut up. The two main sections were found in a junk shop and cobblers shop and were reunited. 110 It is probable that outer parts of the composition are missing. This work is now in the collection of the Uffizi Drawing No. 8P. The Grecian profile has a continuous straight line from forehead to nose-tip the bridge of the nose being exceptionally high. It is a feature of many Classical Greek statues. He also drew with his left hand his hatch strokes slanting down from left to right the natural stroke of a left-handed artist . 134 He also sometimes wrote conventionally with his right hand. 135 Salvator Mundi a painting by Leonardo depicting Jesus holding an orb sold for a world record US450.3 million at a Christies auction in New York 15 November 2017. 169 The highest known sale price for any artwork was previously US300 million for Willem de Kooning s Interchange which was sold privately in September 2015. 170 The highest price previously paid for a work of art at auction was for Pablo Picasso s Les Femmes dAlger which sold for US179.4 million in May 2015 at Christies New York. 170 Dates of works The Adoration of the Magi Kemp 2019 p. 27: c. 14811482 Marani 2003 p. 338: 1481 Syson et al. 2011 p. 56: c. 14801482 Zollner 2019 p. 222: 14811482 Virgin of the Rocks Louvre version Kemp 2019 p. 41: c. 14831493 Marani 2003 p. 339: between 1483 and 1486 Syson et al. 2011 p. 164: 1483 c. 1485 Zollner 2019 p. 223: 148314841485 Saint John the Baptist Kemp 2019 p. 189: c. 15071514 Marani 2003 p. 340: c. 1508 Syson et al. 2011 p. 63: c. 1500 onwards Zollner 2019 p. 248: c. 15081516 The Annunciation Kemp 2019 p. 6: c. 14731474 Marani 2003 p. 338: c. 14721475 Syson et al. 2011 p. 15: c. 14721476 Zollner 2019 p. 216: c. 14731475 Saint Jerome in the Wilderness Kemp 2019 p. 31: c. 14811482 Marani 2003 p. 338: probably c. 1480 Syson et al. 2011 p. 139: c. 14881490 Zollner 2019 p. 221: c. 14801482 Lady with an Ermine Kemp 2019 p. 49: c. 1491 Marani 2003 p. 339: 14891490 Syson et al. 2011 p. 111: c. 14891490 Zollner 2019 p. 226: 14891490 The Last Supper Kemp 2019 p. 67: c. 14951497 Marani 2003 p. 339: between 1494 and 1498 Syson et al. 2011 p. 252: 149214971498 Zollner 2019 p. 230: c. 14951498 Mona Lisa Kemp 2019 p. 127: c. 15031515 Marani 2003 p. 340: c. 15031504; 15131514 Syson et al. 2011 p. 48: c. 1502 onward Zollner 2019 p. 240: c. 15031506; 1510 References Citations Early Vasari 1991 p. 287 Vasari 1991 pp. 287289 a b c Vasari 1991 p. 293 Vasari 1991 p. 297 Vasari 1991 p. 284 Vasari 1991 p. 286 a b c Vasari 1991 p. 290 Vasari 1991 pp. 289291 Vasari 1991 p. 294 Vasari 1965 p. 266 Vasari 1965 p. 255 Modern A portrait of Leonardo c. 151518 . Royal Collection Trust . Archived from the original on 23 November 2020 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 . a b Zollner 2019 p. 20. a b c d e f g Kemp 2003 . a b c d Heydenreich 2020 . Zollner 2019 p. 250. Kaplan Erez 1996. Roberto Guatellis Controversial Replica of Leonardo da Vincis Adding Machine . Archived from the original on 29 May 2011 . Retrieved 19 August 2013 . Kaplan E. April 1997. Anecdotes . IEEE Annals of the History of Computing . 19 2: 6269. doi : 10.1109MAHC.1997.586074 . ISSN 1058-6180 . Archived from the original on 11 July 2022 . Retrieved 9 July 2022 . Capra 2007 pp. 56. Brown 1998 p. 7. Kemp 2006 p. 1. a b c d e f Brown 1998 p. 5. Nicholl 2005 p. 17 . Vezzosi 1997 p. 13. a b c d e f g Ottino della Chiesa 1967 p. 83. Nicholl 2005 p. 20 . Bambach 2019 pp. 16 24. a b Marani 2003 p. 13. Bambach 2019 p. 16. Hooper John 12 April 2008. Da Vincis mother was a slave Italian study claims . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 23 December 2019 . Retrieved 16 August 2015 . Alberge Dalya 21 May 2017. Tuscan archives yield up secrets of Leonardos mystery mother . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 10 May 2020 . Retrieved 5 June 2019 . a b c Bambach 2019 p. 24. Nicholl 2005 p. 18 . Kemp Pallanti 2017 p. 65. a b Kemp Pallanti 2017 pp. 6566. a b Wallace 1972 p. 11. Magnano 2007 p. 138. Brown 1998 pp. 1 5. Marani 2003 p. 12. Brown 1998 p. 175. Nicholl 2005 p. 28 . Nicholl 2005 p. 30 506 . Nicholl 2005 p. 30 . See p. 506 for the original Italian. a b c Rosci 1977 p. 13. a b c Hartt 1970 pp. 127133. Bacci Mina 1978 1963. The Great Artists: Da Vinci . Translated by Tanguy J. New York: Funk Wagnalls. a b c d e f g h i j k l Bortolon 1967 . a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s Arasse 1998 . Rosci 1977 p. 27. Martindale 1972 . a b c d Rosci 1977 pp. 920. Piero della Francesca On Perspective for Painting De Prospectiva Pingendi a b Rachum Ilan 1979. The Renaissance an Illustrated Encyclopedia . Ottino della Chiesa 1967 p. 88. Wallace 1972 p. 13. a b Polidoro Massimo 2019. The Mind of Leonardo da Vinci Part 1 . Skeptical Inquirer . 43 2. Center for Inquiry: 3031. Wallace 1972 p. 15. Clark Kenneth; Kemp Martin 26 November 2015. Leonardo da Vinci Newition ed.. United Kingdom: Penguin. p. 45. ISBN 978-0-14-198237-3 . a b Wasserman 1975 pp. 7778. a b Wallace 1972 pp. 5354. a b c Williamson 1974 . Kemp 2011 . Franz-Joachim Verspohl de Michelangelo Buonarroti und Leonardo Da Vinci: Republikanischer Alltag und Kunstlerkonkurrenz in Florenz zwischen 1501 und 1505 Wallstein Verlag 2007 p. 151. Schofield Richard. Amadeo Bramante and Leonardo and the Cupola of Milan Cathedral . Achademia Leonardi Vinci . Archived from the original on 7 April 2023 . Retrieved 9 August 2022 . Barbieri Ezio; Catanese Filippo January 2020. Leonardo a e i rapporti con Pavia: una verifica sui documenti . Annuario dellArchivio di Stato di Milano . Archived from the original on 7 April 2023 . Retrieved 9 August 2022 . Carlo Pedretti Leonardo da Vinci: drawings of horses and other animals Windsor Castle. Royal Library 1984. Wallace 1972 p. 79. Moffitt John F. 1990. Leonardos Sala delle Asse and the Primordial Origins of Architecture . Arte Lombarda 9293 12. Vita e Pensiero Pubblicazioni dellUniversita Cattolica del Sacro Cuore: 7690. JSTOR 43132702 . Archived from the original on 16 August 2023 . Retrieved 17 August 2023 . Rocky Ruggiero 6 October 2021. Episode 142 Leonardo da Vincis Sala delle Asse . rockyruggiero.com . Making Art and History Come to Life Rebuilding the Renaissance. Archived from the original on 3 June 2023 . Retrieved 11 October 2021 . Segui il restauro Follow the restoration. Castello Sforzesco Sala delle Asse in Italian. Archived from the original on 16 October 2018 . Retrieved 19 October 2018 . Wallace 1972 p. 65. a b c d Ottino della Chiesa 1967 p. 85. Owen Richard 12 January 2005. Found: the studio where Leonardo met Mona Lisa . The Times . London. Archived from the original on 3 July 2020 . Retrieved 5 January 2010 . Wallace 1972 p. 124. Mona Lisa Heidelberg discovery confirms identity . University of Heidelberg . Archived from the original on 5 November 2013 . Retrieved 4 July 2010 . Delieuvin Vincent 15 January 2008. Telematin . Journal Televise . France 2 Television. Coughlan Robert 1966. The World of Michelangelo: 14751564 . et al. Time-Life Books. p. 90 . Goldscheider Ludwig 1967. Michelangelo: paintings sculptures architecture . Phaidon Press. ISBN 978-0-7148-1314-1 . Ottino della Chiesa 1967 pp. 106107. a b c d e Wallace 1972 p. 145. Achademia Leonardi Vinci . Journal of Leonardo Studies Bibliography of Vinciana . VIII : 243244. 1990. a b c Ottino della Chiesa 1967 p. 86. a b Wallace 1972 pp. 149150. Wallace 1972 p. 151. a b c d e Wallace 1972 p. 150. Ohlig Christoph P. J. ed. 2005. Integrated Land and Water Resources Management in History . Books on Demand. p. 33. ISBN 978-3-8334-2463-2 . Gillette Henry Sampson 2017. Leonardo da Vinci: Pathfinder of Science . Prabhat Prakashan. p. 84. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024 . Retrieved 10 September 2019 . Laurenza Domenico 2004. Leonardo nella Roma di Leone X . Lettura Vinciana in Italian. XLIII . Giunti. Sammer Jan 2009. LInvitation du roi . In Pedretti Carlo ed.. Leonard de Vinci et la France in French. CB Edizioni. pp. 2933. Wallace 1972 pp. 163 164. Reconstruction of Leonardos walking lion in Italian. Archived from the original on 25 August 2009 . Retrieved 5 January 2010 . Brown Mark 1 May 2019. Newly identified sketch of Leonardo da Vinci to go on display in London . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 4 December 2020 . Retrieved 2 May 2019 . a b Strickland Ashley 4 May 2019. What caused Leonardo da Vincis hand impairment? . CNN . Archived from the original on 31 October 2020 . Retrieved 4 May 2019 . a b McMahon Barbara 1 May 2005. Da Vinci paralysis left Mona Lisa unfinished . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 8 February 2020 . Retrieved 2 May 2019 . Wallace 1972 p. 163. a b Lorenzi Rossella 10 May 2016. Did a Stroke Kill Leonardo da Vinci? . Seeker . Archived from the original on 22 December 2019 . Retrieved 5 May 2019 . Saplakoglu Yasemin 4 May 2019. A Portrait of Leonardo da Vinci May Reveal Why He Never Finished the Mona Lisa . Live Science . Archived from the original on 2 February 2020 . Retrieved 5 May 2019 . a b Bodkin Henry 4 May 2019. Leonardo da Vinci never finished the Mona Lisa because he injured his arm while fainting experts say . The Telegraph . Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 6 May 2019 . a b Charlier Philippe ; Deo Saudamini. A physical sign of stroke sequel on the skeleton of Leonardo da Vinci? Archived 15 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine . Neurology . 4 April 2017; 8814: 13811382 Ian Chilvers 2003. The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Art and Artists . Oxford England: Oxford University Press. p. 354. ISBN 978-0-19-953294-0 . Antonina Vallentin Leonardo da Vinci: The Tragic Pursuit of Perfection New York: The Viking Press 1938 533 White Leonardo: The First Scientist Kemp 2011 p. 26. a b c Florentine editorial staff 2 May 2019. Hair believed to have belonged to Leonardo on display in Vinci . The Florentine . Archived from the original on 4 May 2019 . Retrieved 4 May 2019 . Gasca Nicolo Lucertini 2004 p. 13 . Leonardo Codex C. 15v . Institut of France. Trans. Richter. Ottino della Chiesa 1967 p. 84. Rossiter Nick 4 July 2003. Could this be the secret of her smile? . Daily Telegraph . London. Archived from the original on 25 September 2003 . Retrieved 3 October 2007 . a b Pedretti Carlo ed. 2009. Leonardo da Vinci: lAngelo incarnato Salai the Angel in the flesh Salai . Foligno Perugia: Cartei Bianchi. p. 201. ISBN 978-88-95686-11-0 . OCLC 500794484 . MacCurdy Edward The Mind of Leonardo da Vinci 1928 in Leonardo da Vincis Ethical Vegetarianism Archived 27 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine Bambach 2003 . Cartwright Ady Julia. Beatrice dEste Duchess of Milan 14751497. Publisher: J.M. Dent 1899; Cartwright Ady Julia. Isabella DEste Marchioness of Mantua 14741539. Publisher; J.M. Dent 1903. Sigmund Freud Eine Kindheitserinnerung des Leonardo da Vinci 1910 Isaacson 2017 pp. 129138. a b Isaacson 2017 . Leonardo ladies man: why cant we accept that Da Vinci was gay? . The Guardian . 26 March 2021. Archived from the original on 11 May 2022 . Retrieved 27 March 2021 . Michael Rocke Forbidden Friendships epigraph p. 148 N120 p. 298 Arasse 1998 pp. 1115. Ottino della Chiesa 1967 pp. 88 90. Marani 2003 p. 338. a b Wasserman 1975 pp. 104106. Wasserman 1975 p. 108. The Mysterious Virgin . National Gallery London . Archived from the original on 15 October 2007 . Retrieved 27 September 2007 . a b Da Vincis Lady with an Ermine among Polands Treasures Event Culture.pl . Archived from the original on 1 December 2017 . Retrieved 18 November 2017 . Kemp M. The Lady with an Ermine in the exhibition Circa 1492: Art in the Age of Exploration . Washington-New Haven-London. p. 271. Wasserman 1975 p. 124. Ottino della Chiesa 1967 p. 97. Ottino della Chiesa 1967 p. 98. Seracini Maurizio 2012. The Secret Lives of Paintings lecture . Archived from the original on 18 October 2019 . Retrieved 14 March 2016 . Wasserman 1975 p. 144. Ottino della Chiesa 1967 p. 103. Wasserman 1975 p. 150. Ottino della Chiesa 1967 p. 109. a b c d e f g h Popham A. E. 1946. The Drawings of Leonardo da Vinci . Ottino della Chiesa 1967 p. 102. Hartt 1970 pp. 391392. a b c Wallace 1972 p. 169. a b c Keele Kenneth D 1964. Leonardo da Vincis Influence on Renaissance Anatomy . Med Hist . 8 4: 360370. doi : 10.1017s0025727300029835 . ISSN 0025-7273 . PMC 1033412 . PMID 14230140 . Bean Jacob; Stampfle Felice 1965. Drawings from New York Collections I: The Italian Renaissance . Greenwich CT: Metropolitan Museum of Art. pp. 8182. Major Richard Henry 1866. Archaeologia: Or Miscellaneous Tracts Relating to Antiquity Volume 40 Part 1 . London: The Society. pp. 1516. Archived from the original on 23 March 2024 . Retrieved 1 October 2019 . Calder Ritchie 1970. Leonardo the Age of the Eye . New York: Simon and Schuster. p. 275. ISBN 978-0-671-20713-7 . Sketches by Leonardo . Turning the Pages . British Library . Archived from the original on 24 June 2010 . Retrieved 27 September 2007 . a b Da Vinci Leonardo 1960. Taylor Pamela; Taylor Francis Henry eds.. The Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci . New York: New American Library . p. x. ISBN 978-0-486-22572-2 . Livio Mario 2003 2002. The Golden Ratio: The Story of Phi the Worlds Most Astonishing Number First trade paperback ed.. New York City: Broadway Books . p. 136. ISBN 0-7679-0816-3 . Archived from the original on 13 March 2023 . Retrieved 22 December 2018 . Wallace 1972 p. 31. Ciaccia Chris 15 April 2019. Da Vinci was ambidextrous new handwriting analysis shows . Fox News . Archived from the original on 13 February 2020 . Retrieved 15 April 2019 . Windsor Castle Royal Library sheets RL 19073v74v and RL 19102. Cook Theodore Andrea 1914. The Curves of Life . London: Constable and Company Ltd. p. 390 . Baucon A. 2010. Da Vincis Paleodictyon : the fractal beauty of traces. Acta Geologica Polonica 601. Accessible from the authors homepage Archived 11 May 2019 at the Wayback Machine OMalley; Saunders 1982. Leonardo on the Human Body . New York: Dover Publications. Ottino della Chiesa 1967 p. 117. Capra 2007 pp. xviixx. Leonardo da Vinci . Britannica . Archived from the original on 9 August 2022 . Retrieved 9 August 2022 . a b Alastair Sooke Daily Telegraph 28 July 2013 Leonardo da Vinci: Anatomy of an artist Archived 2 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine accessed 29 July 2013. Mason Stephen F. 1962. A History of the Sciences . New York: Collier Books. p. 550 . Jones Roger 2012. Leonardo da Vinci: anatomist . British Journal of General Practice . 62 599: 319. doi : 10.3399bjgp12X649241 . ISSN 0960-1643 . PMC 3361109 . PMID 22687222 . Guarnieri M. 2019. Reconsidering Leonardo . IEEE Industrial Electronics Magazine . 13 3: 3538. doi : 10.1109MIE.2019.2929366 . hdl : 115773310853 . S2CID 202729396 . Masters Roger 1996. Machiavelli Leonardo and the Science of Power . Masters Roger 1998. Fortune is a River: Leonardo Da Vinci and Niccolo Machiavellis Magnificent Dream to Change the Course of Florentine History . Simon Schuster. ISBN 978-0-452-28090-8 . Wallace 1972 p. 164. Leonardos Dream Machines TV Movie 2003 . IMDb . Archived from the original on 8 February 2017 . Retrieved 30 June 2018 . British Library online gallery Archived 21 November 2019 at the Wayback Machine retrieved 10 October 2013 Marc van den Broek 2019. Leonardo da Vinci Spirits of Invention. A Search for Traces . Hamburg: A.TE.M. ISBN 978-3-00-063700-1 . Hutchings Ian M. 15 August 2016. Leonardo da Vincis studies of friction . Wear . 360361: 5166. doi : 10.1016j.wear.2016.04.019 . ISSN 0043-1648 . Archived from the original on 12 February 2017 . Retrieved 22 January 2021 . Isaacson 2017 pp. 194197. Dowson Duncan 1 October 1977. Men of Tribology: Leonardo da Vinci 14521519 . Journal of Lubrication Technology . 99 4: 382386. doi : 10.11151.3453230 . ISSN 0022-2305 . Archived from the original on 23 February 2023 . Retrieved 22 January 2021 . Polidoro Massimo 2019. The Mind of Leonardo da Vinci Part 2 . Skeptical Inquirer . 43 3: 2324. a b c Gardner Helen 1970. Art through the Ages . pp. 45056. See the quotations from the following authors in section Fame and reputation : Vasari Boltraffio Castiglione Anonimo Gaddiano Berensen Taine Fuseli Rio Bortolon. Rosci 1977 p. 8. Castiglione Baldassare 1528. Il Cortegiano in Italian. Anonimo Gaddiani elaborating on Libro di Antonio Billi 15371542 Fuseli Henry 1801. Lectures . Vol II. Rio A.E. 1861. Lart chretien in French . Retrieved 19 May 2021 . Taine Hippolyte 1866. Voyage en Italie in Italian. Paris Hachette et cie . Retrieved 19 May 2021 . Berenson Bernard 1896. The Italian Painters of the Renaissance . Henneberger Melinda. ArtNews article about current studies into Leonardos life and works . Art News Online. Archived from the original on 5 May 2006 . Retrieved 10 January 2010 . Marmor Max. The Elmer Belt Library of Vinciana. The Book Collector 38 no. 3 Autumn 1989: 123. Italie Hillel 7 January 2018. NonFiction: Biography honors fun joyous sides of genius da Vinci . Richmond Times-Dispatch . Associated Press. p. G6. Crow Kelly 16 November 2017. Leonardo da Vinci Painting Salvator Mundi Sells for 450.3 Million . The Wall Street Journal . ISSN 0099-9660 . Archived from the original on 29 June 2020 . Retrieved 16 November 2017 . a b Leonardo da Vinci painting Salvator Mundi sold for record 450.3 million Fox News Archived 16 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine 16 November 2017 Leonardo da Vincis Unexamined Life as a Painter . The Atlantic . 1 December 2019. Archived from the original on 29 October 2020 . Retrieved 1 December 2019 . Louvre exhibit has most da Vinci paintings ever assembled . Aleteia. 1 December 2019. Archived from the original on 29 October 2020 . Retrieved 1 December 2019 . Turner 1993 p. 3. Vitruvian Man is referred to as iconic at the following websites and many others: Vitruvian Man Archived 2 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine Fine Art Classics Archived 9 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine Key Images in the History of Science ; Curiosity and difference at the Wayback Machine archived 30 January 2009; The Guardian: The Real da Vinci Code Archived 3 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine Turner Ben 6 July 2021. Scientists may have cracked the mystery of da Vincis DNA . Live Science . Archived from the original on 8 July 2021 . Retrieved 9 July 2021 . a b c d e Nicholl 2005 p. 502 . a b Isaacson 2017 p. 515. a b c d e Montard Nicolas 30 April 2019. Leonard de Vinci est-il vraiment enterre au chateau dAmboise? Is Leonardo da Vinci really buried at the Chateau dAmboise?. Ouest-France in French. Archived from the original on 30 April 2019 . Retrieved 4 May 2019 . Heaton 1874 p. 204 The skeleton which measured five feet eight inches accords with the height of Leonardo da Vinci. The skull might have served for the model of the portrait Leonardo drew of himself in red chalk a few years before his death. . a b c Knapton Sarah 5 May 2016. Leonardo da Vinci paintings analysed for DNA to solve grave mystery . The Daily Telegraph . Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 21 August 2017 . Newman Lily Hay 6 May 2016. Researchers Are Planning to Sequence Leonardo da Vincis 500-Year-Old Genome . Slate Magazine . Archived from the original on 7 March 2020 . Retrieved 4 May 2019 . Messia Hada; Robinson Matthew 30 April 2019. Leonardo da Vincis hair to undergo DNA testing . CNN . Archived from the original on 28 November 2019 . Retrieved 3 May 2019 . Works cited Early Anonimo Gaddiano c. 1530. Leonardo da Vinci . Codice Magliabechiano . in Lives of Leonardo da Vinci Lives of the Artists . Los Angeles: J. Paul Getty Museum . 2019. pp. 103114. ISBN 978-1-60606-621-8 . Giovio Paolo c. 1527. The Life of Leonardo da Vinci . Elogia virorum illustrium . in Lives of Leonardo da Vinci Lives of the Artists . Los Angeles: J. Paul Getty Museum . 2019. pp. 103114. ISBN 978-1-60606-621-8 . Vasari Giorgio 1965 1568. The Life of Leonardo da Vinci . Lives of the Artists . Translated by George Bull. Penguin Classics. ISBN 978-0-14-044164-2 . 1991 1568. The Lives of the Artists . Oxford Worlds Classics. Translated by Bondanella Peter; Bondanella Julia Conway. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-283410-X . Modern Books Arasse Daniel in French 1998. Leonardo da Vinci . Old Saybrook : Konecky Konecky. ISBN 978-1-56852-198-5 . Bambach Carmen C. ed. 2003. Leonardo da Vinci Master Draftsman . New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art . ISBN 978-0-300-09878-5 . Archived from the original on 23 March 2024 . Retrieved 14 November 2020 . Bambach Carmen C. 2019. Leonardo da Vinci Rediscovered . Vol. 1 The Making of an Artist: 14521500. New Haven: Yale University Press . ISBN 978-0-300-19195-0 . Bortolon Liana 1967. The Life and Times of Leonardo . London: Paul Hamlyn. Brown David Alan 1998. Leonardo Da Vinci: Origins of a Genius . New Haven: Yale University Press . ISBN 978-0-300-07246-4 . Archived from the original on 23 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 July 2020 . Capra Fritjof 2007. The Science of Leonardo . US: Doubleday. ISBN 978-0-385-51390-6 . Clark Kenneth 1961. Leonardo da Vinci . City of Westminster: Penguin Books . OCLC 187223 . Gasca Ana Millan; Nicolo Fernando; Lucertini Mario 2004. Technological Concepts and Mathematical Models in the Evolution of Modern Engineering Systems . Birkhauser. ISBN 978-3-7643-6940-8 . Hartt Frederich 1970. A History of Italian Renaissance Art . Thames and Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-23136-4 . Heaton Mary Margaret 1874. Leonardo Da Vinci and His Works: Consisting of a Life of Leonardo Da Vinci . New York: Macmillan Publishers . OCLC 1706262 . Archived from the original on 23 March 2024 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 . Isaacson Walter 2017. Leonardo da Vinci . New York: Simon Schuster . ISBN 978-1-5011-3915-4 . Archived from the original on 23 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 July 2020 . Kemp Martin 2006 1981. Leonardo Da Vinci: The Marvellous Works of Nature and Man . Oxford: Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-920778-7 . Archived from the original on 23 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 July 2020 . Kemp Martin 2011 2004. Leonardo Revised ed.. Oxford England: Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-280644-4 . Kemp Martin; Pallanti Giuseppe 2017. Mona Lisa: The People and the Painting . Oxford: Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-874990-5 . Kemp Martin 2019. Leonardo da Vinci: The 100 Milestones . New York: Sterling . ISBN 978-1-4549-3042-6 . Magnano Milena 2007. Leonardo . I geni dellarte. Milano: Mondadori Arte. ISBN 978-88-370-6432-7 . Marani Pietro C. 2003 2000. Leonardo da Vinci: The Complete Paintings . New York: Harry N. Abrams . ISBN 978-0-8109-3581-5 . Martindale Andrew 1972. The Rise of the Artist . Thames and Hudson. ISBN 978-0-500-56006-8 . Nicholl Charles 2005. Leonardo da Vinci: The Flights of the Mind . London: Penguin Books . ISBN 978-0-14-029681-5 . OMalley Charles D. ; Saunders J.B. de C.M. 1952. Leonardo on the Human Body: The Anatomical Physiological and Embryological Drawings of Leonardo da Vinci. With Translations Emendations and a Biographical Introduction . New York: Henry Schuman. Ottino della Chiesa Angela 1967. The Complete Paintings of Leonardo da Vinci . Classics of the Worlds Great Art. Translated by Jay Madeline. New York: Harry N. Abrams . Pedretti Carlo 1982. Leonardo a study in chronology and style . Cambridge: Johnson Reprint Corp. ISBN 978-0-384-45281-7 . Pedretti Carlo 2006. Leonardo da Vinci . Surrey: Taj Books International. ISBN 978-1-84406-036-8 . Popham A.E. 1946. The Drawings of Leonardo da Vinci . Jonathan Cape. ISBN 978-0-224-60462-8 . Richter Jean Paul 1970. The Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci . Dover. ISBN 978-0-486-22572-2 . volume 2: ISBN 0-486-22573-9 . A reprint of the original 1883 edition Archived 28 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine Rosci Marco 1977. Leonardo . Bay Books Pty Ltd. ISBN 978-0-85835-176-9 . Syson Luke; Keith Larry; Galansino Arturo; Mazzotta Antoni; Nethersole Scott; Rumberg Per 2011. Leonardo da Vinci: Painter at the Court of Milan . London: National Gallery . ISBN 978-1-85709-491-6 . Turner A. Richard 1993. Inventing Leonardo . New York: Alfred A. Knopf . ISBN 978-0-520-08938-9 . Archived from the original on 23 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 July 2020 . Vezzosi Alessandro 1997. Leonardo da Vinci: Renaissance Man . New Horizons series. Translated by Bonfante-Warren Alexandra English translation ed.. London: Thames Hudson . ISBN 978-0-500-30081-7 . Wallace Robert 1972 1966. The World of Leonardo: 14521519 . New York: Time-Life Books. Wasserman Jack 1975. Leonardo da Vinci . New York: Harry N. Abrams . ISBN 978-0-8109-0262-6 . Williamson Hugh Ross 1974. Lorenzo the Magnificent . Michael Joseph. ISBN 978-0-7181-1204-2 . Zollner Frank 2015. Leonardo 2nd ed.. Cologne: Taschen . ISBN 978-3-8365-0215-3 . Zollner Frank 2019 2003. Leonardo da Vinci: The Complete Paintings and Drawings Anniversary ed.. Cologne: Taschen . ISBN 978-3-8365-7625-3 . Journals and encyclopedia articles Brown David Alan 1983. Leonardo and the Idealized Portrait in Milan . Arte Lombarda . 64 4: 102116. JSTOR 43105426 . subscription required Colvin Sidney 1911. Leonardo da Vinci . Encyclopdia Britannica . Vol. 16 11th ed.. pp. 444454. Cremante Simona 2005. Leonardo da Vinci: Artist Scientist Inventor . Giunti. ISBN 978-88-09-03891-2 . Giacomelli Raffaele 1936. Gli scritti di Leonardo da Vinci sul volo . Roma: G. Bardi. Heydenreich Ludwig Heinrich 28 April 2020. Leonardo da Vinci Biography Art Facts Britannica . Encyclopdia Britannica . Chicago: Encyclopdia Britannica Inc. Archived from the original on 25 February 2012 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 . Kemp Martin 2003. Leonardo da Vinci . Grove Art Online . Oxford: Oxford University Press . doi : 10.1093gao9781884446054.article.T050401 . ISBN 978-1-884446-05-4 . Archived from the original on 11 March 2021 . Retrieved 23 July 2020 . subscription or UK public library membership required Lupia John N. Summer 1994. The Secret Revealed: How to Look at Italian Renaissance Painting . Medieval and Renaissance Times . 1 2: 617. ISSN 1075-2110 . Further reading See Kemp 2003 and Bambach 2019 pp. 442579 for extensive bibliographies Library resources about Leonardo da Vinci Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Leonardo da Vinci Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Vanna Arrighi; Bellinazzi Anna; Villata Edoardo eds. 2005. Leonardo da Vinci: la vera immagine: documenti e testimonianze sulla vita e sullopera Leonardo da Vinci: the true image: documents and testimonies on life and work in Italian. Florence: Giunti Editore . ISBN 978-88-09-04519-4 . Vecce Carlo 2006. Leonardo in Italian. Foreword by Carlo Pedretti . Rome: Salerno. ISBN 978-88-8402-548-7 . Winternitz Emanuel 1982. Leonardo da Vinci As a Musician . New Haven: Yale University Press. ISBN 978-0-300-02631-3 . Leonardo da Vinci: anatomical drawings from the Royal Library Windsor Castle . New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art . 1983. ISBN 978-0-87099-362-6 . Archived from the original on 15 July 2017 . Retrieved 31 January 2013 . External links General Universal Leonardo a database of Leonardos life and works maintained by Martin Kemp and Marina Wallace Leonardo da Vinci on the National Gallery website Works Biblioteca Leonardiana online bibliography in Italian e-Leo: Archivio digitale di storia della tecnica e della scienza archive of drawings notes and manuscripts Works by Leonardo da Vinci at Project Gutenberg Works by Leonardo da Vinci at LibriVox public domain audiobooks Complete text and images of Richters translation of the Notebooks The Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci v t e Leonardo da Vinci List of works Science and inventions Personal life Paintings The Annunciation The Baptism of Christ The Madonna of the Carnation Ginevra de Benci Benois Madonna The Adoration of the Magi Saint Jerome in the Wilderness Madonna Litta Virgin of the Rocks Portrait of a Musician Lady with an Ermine La Belle Ferronniere The Last Supper Sala delle Asse Buccleuch Madonna Salvator Mundi Lansdowne Madonna The Virgin and Child with Saint Anne Mona Lisa La Scapigliata Saint John the Baptist Lost paintings Medusa Madonna and Child with the Infant Saint John the Baptist The Holy Infants Embracing The Battle of Anghiari Leda and the Swan Sculptures Budapest Horse Horse and Rider Sforza Horse unexecuted Works on paper Study for the Madonna of the Cat Head of a Bear The Martyrdom of Saint Sebastian Vitruvian Man Portrait of Isabella dEste Studies of the Fetus in the Womb Portrait of a Man in Red Chalk Studies for the Virgin of the Rocks Designs for an Adoration of the Christ Child Head of the Angel Head of the Infant Saint John the Baptist Studies for the Last Supper Head of Christ Relating to the Virgin and Child with Saint Anne The Virgin and Child with Saint Anne and Saint John the Baptist London cartoon Second cartoon lost Christ Child Drapery of the Virgins Legs Drapery of the Virgins Right Arm Head of Saint Anne Head of the Virgin Manuscripts Codex Atlanticus Codex Windsor Codex Arundel Codex Trivulzianus Codex Madrid Codex on the Flight of Birds Codex Leicester A Treatise on Painting Other projects Architonnerre Divina proportione illustrations Great Kite Harpsichord-viola Aerial screw Crossbow Fighting vehicle Robot Self-propelled cart Octant projection Rapid fire crossbow Sonar Viola organista World Map Leonardeschi Giovanni Antonio Boltraffio Cesare da Sesto Bernardino de Conti Giampietrino Giovanni Agostino da Lodi Bernardino Luini Cesare Magni Marco dOggiono Francesco Melzi Giovanni Ambrogio de Predis Salai Andrea Solari Museums Museo leonardiano di Vinci Museo Ideale Leonardo da Vinci Leonardo3 Museum Museo Nazionale Scienza e Tecnologia Leonardo da Vinci Milan Related Cultural references Namesakes Portraits of Leonardo Conservation-restoration of The Last Supper Mona Lisa replicas and reinterpretations Clos Luce High Renaissance Mathematics and art The Lost Leonardo Leda and the Swan Galleria Borghese Collaboration Possible collaboration Category v t e House of Medici People Lords of Florence Cosimo The Elder Piero The Gouty Lorenzo The Magnificent Piero The Brief Giovanni Pope Leo X Giuliano Lorenzo II Giulio Clement VII Ippolito Alessandro The Moor Dukes of Florence Alessandro The Moor Cosimo I Grand Dukes of Tuscany Cosimo I Francesco I Ferdinando I Cosimo II Ferdinando II Cosimo III Gian Gastone Queens of France Caterina Maria Popes Leo X Clement VII Leo XI Cardinals male line : Giovanni Leo X Giulio Clement VII Ippolito Alessandro Leo XI Giovanni Ferdinando I Carlo Giovan Carlo Leopoldo Francesco Maria Francesco female line : Luigi de Rossi Giovanni Salviati Innocenzo Cybo Bernardo Salviati Niccolo Ridolfi Lorenzo Strozzi Ferrante Gonzaga Vincenzo II Gonzaga Bishops and archbishops Filippo Bernardo Antonio Giuliano Zanobi Condottieri Giovanni delle Bande Nere Don Giovanni Mattias Genealogy Genealogical tables of the House of Medici Festina Lente Buildings Villas Cafaggiolo Trebbio Careggi Fiesole La Quiete Collesalvetti Poggio a Caiano Castello Mezzomonte Agnano Spedaletto La Petraia Camugliano Stabbia La Topaia Cerreto Guidi Marignolle Arena Metato Poggio Imperiale Lapeggi LAmbrogiana La Magia Liliano Coltano Montevettolini Artimino Buti Seravezza Madama Palaces Casino Mediceo di San Marco Palazzo Medici Riccardi Palazzo Madama Palazzo Pitti Villa Medici Palazzo Medici Tornaquinci Livorno Palazzo delle Vedove Pisa Materdei Palazzo Medici di Ottaviano Fountains and gardens Medici fountain Villa di Pratolino Fortresses Arezzo Grosseto Piombino Pistoia San Piero a Sieve Siena Volterra Chapels Magi Chapel Medici Chapels San Lorenzo New Sacristy Cappella dei Principi Old Sacristy Patronage Painters sculptors and architects Bartolomeo Ammannati Sandro Botticelli Filippo Brunelleschi Michelangelo Michelangelo and the Medici Bernardo Buontalenti Leonardo da Vinci Donatello Michelozzo Antonio del Pollaiuolo Jacopo della Quercia Giorgio Vasari Poets and other literary figures Agnolo Poliziano Niccolo Machiavelli Humanists and philosophers Pico della Mirandola Marsilio Ficino Scientists Galileo Galilei Musicians Emilio de Cavalieri Jacopo Peri Heraldry Medici coat of arms Crown of the Grand Duke of Tuscany Order of Saint Stephen Institutions Medici Bank Art Medici lions Medici porcelain Medici Vase Venus de Medici Arazzeria Medicea Related Medici giraffe Galilean moons Stories set to music: opera Albizzi Pazzi conspiracy Savonarola TV series episodes v t e Mathematics and art Concepts Algorithm Catenary Fractal Golden ratio Hyperboloid structure Minimal surface Paraboloid Perspective Camera lucida Camera obscura Plastic ratio Projective geometry Proportion Architecture Human Symmetry Tessellation Wallpaper group Forms Algorithmic art Anamorphic art Architecture Geodesic dome Pyramid Vastu shastra Computer art Fiber arts 4D art Fractal art Islamic geometric patterns Girih Jali Muqarnas Zellij Knotting Celtic knot Croatian interlace Interlace Music Origami Mathematics Sculpture String art Tiling Artworks List of works designed with the golden ratio Continuum Mathemalchemy Mathematica: A World of Numbers... and Beyond Octacube Pi Pi in the Sky Buildings Cathedral of Saint Mary of the Assumption Hagia Sophia Pantheon Parthenon Pyramid of Khufu Sagrada Familia Sydney Opera House Taj Mahal Artists Renaissance Paolo Uccello Piero della Francesca Leonardo da Vinci Vitruvian Man Albrecht Durer Parmigianino Self-portrait in a Convex Mirror 19th20th Century William Blake The Ancient of Days Newton Jean Metzinger Danseuse au cafe LOiseau bleu Giorgio de Chirico Man Ray M. C. Escher Circle Limit III Print Gallery Relativity Reptiles Waterfall Rene Magritte La condition humaine Salvador Dali Crucifixion The Swallows Tail Crockett Johnson Contemporary Max Bill Martin and Erik Demaine Scott Draves Jan Dibbets John Ernest Helaman Ferguson Peter Forakis Susan Goldstine Bathsheba Grossman George W. Hart Desmond Paul Henry Anthony Hill Charles Jencks Garden of Cosmic Speculation Andy Lomas Robert Longhurst Jeanette McLeod Hamid Naderi Yeganeh Istvan Orosz Hinke Osinga Antoine Pevsner Tony Robbin Alba Rojo Cama Reza Sarhangi Oliver Sin Hiroshi Sugimoto Daina Taimina Roman Verostko Margaret Wertheim Theorists Ancient Polykleitos Canon Vitruvius De architectura Renaissance Filippo Brunelleschi Leon Battista Alberti De pictura De re aedificatoria Piero della Francesca De prospectiva pingendi Luca Pacioli De divina proportione Leonardo da Vinci A Treatise on Painting Albrecht Durer Vier Bucher von Menschlicher Proportion Sebastiano Serlio Regole generali darchitettura Andrea Palladio I quattro libri dellarchitettura Romantic Samuel Colman Natures Harmonic Unity Frederik Macody Lund Ad Quadratum Jay Hambidge The Greek Vase Modern Owen Jones The Grammar of Ornament Ernest Hanbury Hankin The Drawing of Geometric Patterns in Saracenic Art G. H. Hardy A Mathematicians Apology George David Birkhoff Aesthetic Measure Douglas Hofstadter Godel Escher Bach Nikos Salingaros The Life of a Carpet Publications Journal of Mathematics and the Arts Lumen Naturae Making Mathematics with Needlework Rhythm of Structure Viewpoints: Mathematical Perspective and Fractal Geometry in Art Organizations Ars Mathematica The Bridges Organization European Society for Mathematics and the Arts Goudreau Museum of Mathematics in Art and Science Institute For Figuring Mathemalchemy National Museum of Mathematics Related Droste effect Mathematical beauty Patterns in nature Sacred geometry Category v t e Leonardo da Vinci s Mona Lisa Lisa del Giocondo subject Replicas Isleworth Mona Lisa 16th century Mona Lisa Prado c. 1503 1516 Hermitage Mona Lisa c. 1550 L.H.O.O.Q. 1919 Mini Lisa 2013 Related Replicas and reinterpretations Speculations Male Mona Lisa theories Two Mona Lisa theory Timeline of fictional stories about the Mona Lisa La Joconde nue 1911 theft Eduardo de Valfierno Yves Chaudron Vincenzo Peruggia On screen The Theft of the Mona Lisa 1931 Arsene Lupin 1932 The Mona Lisa Has Been Stolen 1966 City of Death 1979 Mona Lisa Descending a Staircase 1992 Mona Lisas Revenge 2009 Glass Onion: A Knives Out Mystery 2022 Music Mona Lisa 1915 opera Mona Lisa 1950 song Mona Lisa Lost Her Smile 1984 song Lisa Mona Lisa 1988 song The Ballad of Mona Lisa 2011 song The Mona Lisa 2013 song In Search of Mona Lisa 2019 EP Literature The Second Mrs. Giaconda 1975 I Mona Lisa 2006 The Smile 2008 v t e High Renaissance Principal proponents Donato Bramante Giorgione Michelangelo Raphael Titian Leonardo da Vinci Other artists Mariotto Albertinelli Pellegrino Aretusi Fra Bartolomeo Ludovico Beretta Moretto da Brescia Gasparo Cairano Giulio Clovio Antonio da Correggio Piero di Cosimo Bernardino delle Croci Girolamo Genga Lorenzo Lotto Maffeo Olivieri Baldassare Peruzzi Sebastiano del Piombo Antonio da Sangallo the Younger Andrea del Sarto Il Sodoma Tamagnino Palma Vecchio Antonio Vassilacchi Major works The Last Supper c. 14921498 Pieta 14981499 San Pietro in Montorio 1500 David 15011504 Mona Lisa c. 15021516 St. Peters Basilica 15061513 Sistine Chapel ceiling 15081512 Raphael Rooms 15091524 Transfiguration 15161520 The Last Judgment 15361541 Related Art patronage of Julius II Jacob Burckhardt Johann Joachim Winckelmann Leonardeschi Giorgio Vasari The Lives Portals : Anatomy Architecture Astronomy Biography Earth Sciences Engineering History of science Italy Literature Mathematics Music Painting Science Stars Technology The arts Visual arts Leonardo da Vinci at Wikipedias sister projects : Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Data from Wikidata Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Russia Spain Romania Portugal Netherlands Norway Taiwan Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii ORCID Mathematics Genealogy Project Scopus zbMATH 2 MathSciNet Artists ULAN MusicBrainz RKD Artists KulturNav 2 Victoria Museum of Modern Art Scientific illustrators Auckland Stadel Prado People BMLO Trove Italian People Structurae Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA SNAC Te Papa New Zealand RISM Retrieved from https:en.wikipedia.orgwindex.php?titleLeonardodaVincioldid1246416383 Categories : Leonardo da Vinci 1452 births 1519 deaths 15th-century Italian mathematicians 15th-century Italian painters 15th-century Italian scientists 15th-century Italian sculptors 15th-century people from the Republic of Florence 16th-century Italian mathematicians 16th-century Italian painters 16th-century Italian scientists 16th-century Italian sculptors 16th-century people from the Republic of Florence Ambassadors of the Republic of Florence Ballistics experts Fabulists Painters from Florence Italian botanical illustrators Fluid dynamicists History of anatomy Italian anatomists Italian caricaturists Italian civil engineers 16th-century Italian inventors Italian male painters Italian male sculptors Italian military engineers Italian physiologists Italian Renaissance humanists Italian Renaissance painters Italian Renaissance sculptors Italian Roman Catholics Mathematical artists People prosecuted under anti-homosexuality laws Philosophical theists Physiognomists Italian Renaissance architects Renaissance scientists Burials in France Writers who illustrated their own writing Hidden categories: Pages with non-numeric formatnum arguments Pages using the Phonos extension Articles containing French-language text Pages with Italian IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Italian-language text CS1 Italian-language sources it CS1 French-language sources fr Webarchive template wayback links CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Good articles Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages EngvarB from May 2024 Use dmy dates from May 2024 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Pages using Lang-xx templates Articles containing Spanish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from February 2023 CS1 interwiki-linked names Pages containing links to subscription-only content Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with LibriVox links Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 18 September 2024 at 20:33 UTC . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view