Mahatma Gandhi - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Donate Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 1 Early life and background Toggle Early life and background subsection 1.1 Parents 1.2 Childhood 1.3 Marriage 2 Three years in London Toggle Three years in London subsection 2.1 Student of law 2.2 Vegetarianism and committee work 2.3 Called to the bar 3 Civil rights activist in South Africa 18931914 Toggle Civil rights activist in South Africa 18931914 subsection 3.1 Europeans Indians and Africans 4 Struggle for Indian independence 19151947 Toggle Struggle for Indian independence 19151947 subsection 4.1 Role in World War I 4.2 Champaran agitations 4.3 Kheda agitations 4.4 Khilafat movement 4.5 Non-co-operation 4.6 Salt Satyagraha Salt MarchCivil Disobedience Movement 4.7 Gandhi as folk hero 4.8 Negotiations 4.9 Round Table Conferences 4.10 Congress politics 4.11 World War II and Quit India movement 4.12 Partition and independence 5 Death Toggle Death subsection 5.1 Funeral and memorials 6 Principles practices and beliefs Toggle Principles practices and beliefs subsection 6.1 Truth and Satyagraha 6.2 Nonviolence 7 Literary works 8 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 8.1 Followers and international influence 8.2 Global days that celebrate Gandhi 8.3 Awards 8.3.1 Father of the Nation 8.4 Film theatre and literature 8.5 Current impact within India 8.6 Descendants 9 See also 10 Notes Toggle Notes subsection 10.1 Explanatory notes 10.2 Citations 11 General and cited references Toggle General and cited references subsection 11.1 Books 11.2 Scholarly articles 11.3 Primary sources 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Mahatma Gandhi 200 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch nglisc Aragones Arpetan Asturianu Avanee Aymar aru Azrbaycanca Basa Bali Banjar Ban-lam-gu Bikol Central Bosanski Brezhoneg Catala Cebuano Cestina Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Espanol Esperanto Euskara Fiji Hindi Froyskt Francais Frysk Gaeilge Gaidhlig Galego Goychi Konknni Hausa Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Islenska Italiano Jawa Kaby Kernowek Kiswahili Kotava Kreyol ayisyen Kriyol gwiyannen Kurdi Ladino Latina Latviesu Letzebuergesch Lietuviu Limburgs Lingala Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Lombard Magyar Malagasy Malti Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Nederlands Nordfriisk Norsk bokmal Norsk nynorsk Occitan Ozbekcha Papiamentu Patois Picard Piemonteis Tok Pisin Plattduutsch Polski Portugues Qaraqalpaqsha Qrmtatarca Romana Romani chib Runa Simi Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English SiSwati Slovencina Slovenscina Soomaaliga srpski Srpskohrvatski Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog Taclhit Taqbaylit tatarca Turkce Turkmence Uyghurche Veneto Vepsan kel Tieng Viet Volapuk Voro Winaray Xitsonga Yoruba Zazaki Zemaiteska Batak Mandailing Dusun Bundu-liwan Tolsi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Multilingual Wikisource Wikiquote Wikisource Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Indian independence activist 18691948 Gandhi redirects here. For other uses see Gandhi disambiguation . Mahatma Gandhi Gandhi in 1931 Born Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi 1869-10-02 2 October 1869 Porbandar Porbandar State Kathiawar Agency British India Died 30 January 1948 1948-01-30 aged 78 New Delhi Dominion of India Cause of death Assassination gunshot wounds Monuments Raj Ghat Gandhi Smriti Other names Bapu father Rastrapita the Father of the Nation Citizenship Indian Empire until 1947 Dominion of India from 1947 Alma mater Samaldas Arts College a University College London b Inns of Court School of Law Occupations Lawyer anti-colonialist political ethicist Years active 18931948 Era British Raj Known for Leadership of the campaign for Indias independence from British rule Nonviolent resistance Political party Indian National Congress 19201934 Spouse Kasturba Gandhi m. 1883; died 1944 Children Harilal Manilal Ramdas Devdas Parents Karamchand Gandhi Putlibai Gandhi Relatives Gandhi family President of the Indian National Congress In office December 1924 April 1925 Preceded by Abul Kalam Azad Succeeded by Sarojini Naidu Mahatma Gandhis voice Mahatma Gandhis spiritual message to the world Recorded 17 October 1931 Signature Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi ISO : Mohanadasa Karamacamda Gamdhi ; c 2 October 1869 30 January 1948 was an Indian lawyer anti-colonial nationalist and political ethicist who employed nonviolent resistance to lead the successful campaign for Indias independence from British rule . He inspired movements for civil rights and freedom across the world. The honorific Mahatma from Sanskrit great-souled venerable first applied to him in South Africa in 1914 is now used throughout the world. 2 Born and raised in a Hindu family in coastal Gujarat Gandhi trained in the law at the Inner Temple in London and was called to the bar in June 1891 at the age of 22. After two uncertain years in India where he was unable to start a successful law practice Gandhi moved to South Africa in 1893 to represent an Indian merchant in a lawsuit. He went on to live in South Africa for 21 years. There Gandhi raised a family and first employed nonviolent resistance in a campaign for civil rights. In 1915 aged 45 he returned to India and soon set about organising peasants farmers and urban labourers to protest against discrimination and excessive land-tax. Assuming leadership of the Indian National Congress in 1921 Gandhi led nationwide campaigns for easing poverty expanding womens rights building religious and ethnic amity ending untouchability and above all achieving swaraj or self-rule. Gandhi adopted the short dhoti woven with hand-spun yarn as a mark of identification with Indias rural poor. He began to live in a self-sufficient residential community to eat simple food and undertake long fasts as a means of both introspection and political protest. Bringing anti-colonial nationalism to the common Indians Gandhi led them in challenging the British-imposed salt tax with the 400 km 250 mi Dandi Salt March in 1930 and in calling for the British to quit India in 1942. He was imprisoned many times and for many years in both South Africa and India. Gandhis vision of an independent India based on religious pluralism was challenged in the early 1940s by a Muslim nationalism which demanded a separate homeland for Muslims within British India . In August 1947 Britain granted independence but the British Indian Empire was partitioned into two dominions a Hindu-majority India and a Muslim-majority Pakistan . As many displaced Hindus Muslims and Sikhs made their way to their new lands religious violence broke out especially in the Punjab and Bengal . Abstaining from the official celebration of independence Gandhi visited the affected areas attempting to alleviate distress. In the months following he undertook several hunger strikes to stop the religious violence. The last of these was begun in Delhi on 12 January 1948 when Gandhi was 78. The belief that Gandhi had been too resolute in his defence of both Pakistan and Indian Muslims spread among some Hindus in India. Among these was Nathuram Godse a militant Hindu nationalist from Pune western India who assassinated Gandhi by firing three bullets into his chest at an interfaith prayer meeting in Delhi on 30 January 1948. Gandhis birthday 2 October is commemorated in India as Gandhi Jayanti a national holiday and worldwide as the International Day of Nonviolence . Gandhi is considered to be the Father of the Nation in post-colonial India. During Indias nationalist movement and in several decades immediately after he was also commonly called Bapu Gujarati endearment for father roughly papa 3 daddy 4 . Early life and background Parents Gandhis father Karamchand Uttamchand Gandhi 18221885 served as the dewan chief minister of Porbandar state. 5 6 His family originated from the then village of Kutiana in what was then Junagadh State . 7 Although Karamchand only had been a clerk in the state administration and had an elementary education he proved a capable chief minister. 7 During his tenure Karamchand married four times. His first two wives died young after each had given birth to a daughter and his third marriage was childless. In 1857 Karamchand sought his third wifes permission to remarry; that year he married Putlibai 18441891 who also came from Junagadh 7 and was from a Pranami Vaishnava family. 8 9 10 Karamchand and Putlibai had four children: a son Laxmidas c. 1860 1914; a daughter Raliatbehn 18621960; a second son Karsandas c. 1866 1913. 11 12 and a third son Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi 13 who was born on 2 October 1869 in Porbandar also known as Sudamapuri a coastal town on the Kathiawar Peninsula and then part of the small princely state of Porbandar in the Kathiawar Agency of the British Raj . 14 In 1874 Gandhis father Karamchand left Porbandar for the smaller state of Rajkot where he became a counsellor to its ruler the Thakur Sahib; though Rajkot was a less prestigious state than Porbandar the British regional political agency was located there which gave the states diwan a measure of security. 15 In 1876 Karamchand became diwan of Rajkot and was succeeded as diwan of Porbandar by his brother Tulsidas. Karamchands family then rejoined him in Rajkot. 15 They moved to their family home Kaba Gandhi No Delo in 1881. 16 Childhood As a child Gandhi was described by his sister Raliat as restless as mercury either playing or roaming about. One of his favourite pastimes was twisting dogs ears. 17 The Indian classics especially the stories of Shravana and king Harishchandra had a great impact on Gandhi in his childhood. In his autobiography Gandhi states that they left an indelible impression on his mind. Gandhi writes: It haunted me and I must have acted Harishchandra to myself times without number. Gandhis early self-identification with truth and love as supreme values is traceable to these epic characters. 18 19 The familys religious background was eclectic. Mohandas was born into a Gujarati Hindu Modh Bania family. 20 21 Gandhis father Karamchand was Hindu and his mother Putlibai was from a Pranami Vaishnava Hindu family. 22 23 Gandhis father was of Modh Baniya caste in the varna of Vaishya . 24 His mother came from the medieval Krishna bhakti-based Pranami tradition whose religious texts include the Bhagavad Gita the Bhagavata Purana and a collection of 14 texts with teachings that the tradition believes to include the essence of the Vedas the Quran and the Bible . 23 25 Gandhi was deeply influenced by his mother an extremely pious lady who would not think of taking her meals without her daily prayers... she would take the hardest vows and keep them without flinching. To keep two or three consecutive fasts was nothing to her. 26 Gandhi right with his eldest brother Laxmidas in 1886 27 At the age of nine Gandhi entered the local school in Rajkot near his home. There he studied the rudiments of arithmetic history the Gujarati language and geography. 15 At the age of 11 Gandhi joined the High School in Rajkot Alfred High School . 28 He was an average student won some prizes but was a shy and tongue-tied student with no interest in games; Gandhis only companions were books and school lessons. 29 Marriage In May 1883 the 13-year-old Mohandas Gandhi was married to 14-year-old Kasturbai Gokuldas Kapadia her first name was usually shortened to Kasturba and affectionately to Ba in an arranged marriage according to the custom of the region at that time. 30 In the process he lost a year at school but was later allowed to make up by accelerating his studies. 31 Gandhis wedding was a joint event where his brother and cousin were also married. Recalling the day of their marriage Gandhi once said As we didnt know much about marriage for us it meant only wearing new clothes eating sweets and playing with relatives. As was the prevailing tradition the adolescent bride was to spend much time at her parents house and away from her husband. 32 Writing many years later Mohandas described with regret the lustful feelings he felt for his young bride by saying Even at school I used to think of her and the thought of nightfall and our subsequent meeting was ever haunting me. Gandhi later recalled feeling jealous and possessive of her such as when Kasturba would visit a temple with her girlfriends and being sexually lustful in his feelings for her. 33 In late 1885 Gandhis father Karamchand died. 34 Gandhi had left his fathers bedside to be with his wife mere minutes before his passing. Many decades later Gandhi wrote if animal passion had not blinded me. I should have been spared the torture of separation from my father during his last moments. 35 Later Gandhi then 16 years old and his wife of age 17 had their first child who survived only a few days. The two deaths anguished Gandhi. 34 The Gandhi couple had four more children all sons: Harilal born in 1888; Manilal born in 1892; Ramdas born in 1897; and Devdas born in 1900. 30 In November 1887 the 18-year-old Gandhi graduated from high school in Ahmedabad . 36 In January 1888 he enrolled at Samaldas College in Bhavnagar State then the sole degree-granting institution of higher education in the region. However Gandhi dropped out and returned to his family in Porbandar. 37 Outside school Gandhis education was enriched by exposure to Gujarati literature especially reformers like Narmad and Govardhanram Tripathi whose works alerted the Gujaratis to their own faults and weaknesses such as belief in religious dogmatism. 38 Three years in London Student of law Commemorative plaque at 20 Barons Court Road Barons Court London Gandhi had dropped out of the cheapest college he could afford in Bombay. 39 Mavji Dave Joshiji a Brahmin priest and family friend advised Gandhi and his family that he should consider law studies in London. 37 40 In July 1888 Gandhis wife Kasturba gave birth to their first surviving child Harilal. 41 Gandhis mother was not comfortable about Gandhi leaving his wife and family and going so far from home. Gandhis uncle Tulsidas also tried to dissuade his nephew but Gandhi wanted to go. To persuade his wife and mother Gandhi made a vow in front of his mother that he would abstain from meat alcohol and women. Gandhis brother Laxmidas who was already a lawyer cheered Gandhis London studies plan and offered to support him. Putlibai gave Gandhi her permission and blessing. 37 42 Gandhi in London as a law student On 10 August 1888 Gandhi aged 18 left Porbandar for Mumbai then known as Bombay. A local newspaper covering the farewell function by his old high school in Rajkot noted that Gandhi was the first Bania from Kathiawar to proceed to England for his Barrister Examination. 43 As Mohandas Gandhi waited for a berth on a ship to London he found that he had attracted the ire of the Modh Banias of Bombay. 44 Upon arrival in Bombay he stayed with the local Modh Bania community whose elders warned Gandhi that England would tempt him to compromise his religion and eat and drink in Western ways. Despite Gandhi informing them of his promise to his mother and her blessings Gandhi was excommunicated from his caste. Gandhi ignored this and on 4 September he sailed from Bombay to London with his brother seeing him off. 39 41 Gandhi attended University College London where he took classes in English literature with Henry Morley in 18881889. 45 Gandhi also enrolled at the Inns of Court School of Law in Inner Temple with the intention of becoming a barrister . 40 His childhood shyness and self-withdrawal had continued through his teens. Gandhi retained these traits when he arrived in London but joined a public speaking practice group and overcame his shyness sufficiently to practise law. 46 Gandhi demonstrated a keen interest in the welfare of Londons impoverished dockland communities. In 1889 a bitter trade dispute broke out in London with dockers striking for better pay and conditions and seamen shipbuilders factory girls and other joining the strike in solidarity. The strikers were successful in part due to the mediation of Cardinal Manning leading Gandhi and an Indian friend to make a point of visiting the cardinal and thanking him for his work. 47 Vegetarianism and committee work His vow to his mother influenced Gandhis time in London. Gandhi tried to adopt English customs including taking dancing lessons. 48 However he didnt appreciate the bland vegetarian food offered by his landlady and was frequently hungry until he found one of Londons few vegetarian restaurants. Influenced by Henry Salts writing Gandhi joined the London Vegetarian Society and was elected to its executive committee under the aegis of its president and benefactor Arnold Hills . 49 An achievement while on the committee was the establishment of a Bayswater chapter. 50 Some of the vegetarians Gandhi met were members of the Theosophical Society which had been founded in 1875 to further universal brotherhood and which was devoted to the study of Buddhist and Hindu literature. They encouraged Gandhi to join them in reading the Bhagavad Gita both in translation as well as in the original. 49 Gandhi had a friendly and productive relationship with Hills but the two men took a different view on the continued LVS membership of fellow committee member Thomas Allinson . Their disagreement is the first known example of Gandhi challenging authority despite his shyness and temperamental disinclination towards confrontation. citation needed Allinson had been promoting newly available birth control methods but Hills disapproved of these believing they undermined public morality. He believed vegetarianism to be a moral movement and that Allinson should therefore no longer remain a member of the LVS. Gandhi shared Hills views on the dangers of birth control but defended Allinsons right to differ. 51 It would have been hard for Gandhi to challenge Hills; Hills was 12 years his senior and unlike Gandhi highly eloquent. Hills bankrolled the LVS and was a captain of industry with his Thames Ironworks company employing more than 6 000 people in the East End of London . Hills was also a highly accomplished sportsman who later founded the football club West Ham United . In his 1927 An Autobiography Vol. I Gandhi wrote: The question deeply interested me...I had a high regard for Mr. Hills and his generosity. But I thought it was quite improper to exclude a man from a vegetarian society simply because he refused to regard puritan morals as one of the objects of the society 51 A motion to remove Allinson was raised and was debated and voted on by the committee. Gandhis shyness was an obstacle to his defence of Allinson at the committee meeting. Gandhi wrote his views down on paper but shyness prevented Gandhi from reading out his arguments so Hills the President asked another committee member to read them out for him. Although some other members of the committee agreed with Gandhi the vote was lost and Allinson was excluded. There were no hard feelings with Hills proposing the toast at the LVS farewell dinner in honour of Gandhis return to India. 52 Called to the bar Gandhi at age 22 was called to the bar in June 1891 and then left London for India where he learned that his mother had died while he was in London and that his family had kept the news from Gandhi. 49 His attempts at establishing a law practice in Bombay failed because Gandhi was psychologically unable to cross-examine witnesses. He returned to Rajkot to make a modest living drafting petitions for litigants but Gandhi was forced to stop after running afoul of British officer Sam Sunny. 49 50 In 1893 a Muslim merchant in Kathiawar named Dada Abdullah contacted Gandhi. Abdullah owned a large successful shipping business in South Africa. His distant cousin in Johannesburg needed a lawyer and they preferred someone with Kathiawari heritage. Gandhi inquired about his pay for the work. They offered a total salary of 105 4 143 in 2023 money plus travel expenses. He accepted it knowing that it would be at least a one-year commitment in the Colony of Natal South Africa also a part of the British Empire. 50 53 Civil rights activist in South Africa 18931914 Bronze statue of Gandhi commemorating the centenary of the incident at the Pietermaritzburg Railway Station unveiled by Archbishop Desmond Tutu on Church Street Pietermaritzburg in June 1993 In April 1893 Gandhi aged 23 set sail for South Africa to be the lawyer for Abdullahs cousin. 53 54 Gandhi spent 21 years in South Africa where he developed his political views ethics and politics. 55 56 During this time Gandhi briefly returned to India in 1902 to mobilise support for the welfare of Indians in South Africa. 57 Immediately upon arriving in South Africa Gandhi faced discrimination due to his skin colour and heritage. 58 Gandhi was not allowed to sit with European passengers in the stagecoach and was told to sit on the floor near the driver then beaten when he refused; elsewhere Gandhi was kicked into a gutter for daring to walk near a house in another instance thrown off a train at Pietermaritzburg after refusing to leave the first-class. 39 59 Gandhi sat in the train station shivering all night and pondering if he should return to India or protest for his rights. 59 Gandhi chose to protest and was allowed to board the train the next day. 60 In another incident the magistrate of a Durban court ordered Gandhi to remove his turban which he refused to do. 39 Indians were not allowed to walk on public footpaths in South Africa. Gandhi was kicked by a police officer out of the footpath onto the street without warning. 39 When Gandhi arrived in South Africa according to Arthur Herman he thought of himself as a Briton first and an Indian second. 61 However the prejudice against Gandhi and his fellow Indians from British people that Gandhi experienced and observed deeply bothered him. Gandhi found it humiliating struggling to understand how some people can feel honour or superiority or pleasure in such inhumane practices. 59 Gandhi began to question his peoples standing in the British Empire . 62 The Abdullah case that had brought him to South Africa concluded in May 1894 and the Indian community organised a farewell party for Gandhi as he prepared to return to India. 63 The farewell party was turned into a working committee to plan the resistance to a new Natal government discriminatory proposal. This led to Gandhi extending his original period of stay in South Africa. Gandhi planned to assist Indians in opposing a bill to deny them the right to vote a right then proposed to be an exclusive European right. He asked Joseph Chamberlain the British Colonial Secretary to reconsider his position on this bill. 55 Though unable to halt the bills passage Gandhis campaign was successful in drawing attention to the grievances of Indians in South Africa. He helped found the Natal Indian Congress in 1894 50 60 and through this organisation Gandhi moulded the Indian community of South Africa into a unified political force. In January 1897 when Gandhi landed in Durban a mob of white settlers attacked him 64 and Gandhi escaped only through the efforts of the wife of the police superintendent. citation needed However Gandhi refused to press charges against any member of the mob. 50 Gandhi middle third from right with the stretcher-bearers of the Indian Ambulance Corps during the Boer War During the Boer War Gandhi volunteered in 1900 to form a group of stretcher-bearers as the Natal Indian Ambulance Corps . According to Arthur Herman Gandhi wanted to disprove the British colonial stereotype that Hindus were not fit for manly activities involving danger and exertion unlike the Muslim martial races . 65 Gandhi raised 1 100 Indian volunteers to support British combat troops against the Boers. They were trained and medically certified to serve on the front lines. They were auxiliaries at the Battle of Colenso to a White volunteer ambulance corps. At the Battle of Spion Kop Gandhi and his bearers moved to the front line and had to carry wounded soldiers for miles to a field hospital since the terrain was too rough for the ambulances. Gandhi and 37 other Indians received the Queens South Africa Medal . 66 67 Gandhi and his wife Kasturba 1902 In 1906 the Transvaal government promulgated a new Act compelling registration of the colonys Indian and Chinese populations. At a mass protest meeting held in Johannesburg on 11 September that year Gandhi adopted his still evolving methodology of Satyagraha devotion to the truth or nonviolent protest for the first time. 68 According to Anthony Parel Gandhi was also influenced by the Tamil moral text Tirukkural after Leo Tolstoy mentioned it in their correspondence that began with A Letter to a Hindu . 69 70 Gandhi urged Indians to defy the new law and to suffer the punishments for doing so. His ideas of protests persuasion skills and public relations had emerged. Gandhi took these back to India in 1915. 71 72 Europeans Indians and Africans Gandhi focused his attention on Indians and Africans while he was in South Africa. Initially Gandhi was not interested in politics but this changed after he was discriminated against and bullied such as by being thrown out of a train coach due to his skin colour by a white train official. After several such incidents with Whites in South Africa Gandhis thinking and focus changed and he felt he must resist this and fight for rights. Gandhi entered politics by forming the Natal Indian Congress. 73 According to Ashwin Desai and Goolam Vahed Gandhis views on racism are contentious in some cases. He suffered persecution from the beginning in South Africa. Like with other coloured people white officials denied Gandhi his rights and the press and those in the streets bullied and called Gandhi a parasite semi-barbarous canker squalid coolie yellow man and other epithets. People would even spit on him as an expression of racial hate. 74 Advertisement of the Indian Opinion a newspaper founded by Gandhi While in South Africa Gandhi focused on the racial persecution of Indians before he started to focus on racism against Africans. In some cases state Desai and Vahed Gandhis behaviour was one of being a willing part of racial stereotyping and African exploitation. 74 During a speech in September 1896 Gandhi complained that the whites in the British colony of South Africa were degrading the Indian to the level of a raw Kaffir . 75 Scholars cite it as an example of evidence that Gandhi at that time thought of Indians and black South Africans differently. 74 As another example given by Herman Gandhi at the age of 24 prepared a legal brief for the Natal Assembly in 1895 seeking voting rights for Indians. Gandhi cited race history and European Orientalists opinions that Anglo-Saxons and Indians are sprung from the same Aryan stock or rather the Indo-European peoples and argued that Indians should not be grouped with the Africans. 63 Years later Gandhi and his colleagues served and helped Africans as nurses and by opposing racism. The Nobel Peace Prize winner Nelson Mandela is among admirers of Gandhis efforts to fight against racism in Africa. 76 The general image of Gandhi state Desai and Vahed has been reinvented since his assassination as though Gandhi was always a saint when in reality his life was more complex contained inconvenient truths and was one that changed over time. 74 Scholars have also pointed the evidence to a rich history of co-operation and efforts by Gandhi and Indian people with nonwhite South Africans against persecution of Africans and the Apartheid . 77 In 1903 Gandhi started the Indian Opinion a journal that carried new of Indians in South Africa Indians in India with articles on all subjects -social moral and intellectual. Each issue was multi-lingual and carried material in English Gujarati Hindi and Tamil. It carried ads depended heavily on Gandhis contributions often printed without a byline and was an advocate for the Indian cause. 78 In 1906 when the Bambatha Rebellion broke out in the colony of Natal the then 36-year-old Gandhi despite sympathising with the Zulu rebels encouraged Indian South Africans to form a volunteer stretcher-bearer unit. 79 Writing in the Indian Opinion Gandhi argued that military service would be beneficial to the Indian community and claimed it would give them health and happiness. 80 Gandhi eventually led a volunteer mixed unit of Indian and African stretcher-bearers to treat wounded combatants during the suppression of the rebellion. 79 Gandhi photographed in South Africa 1909 The medical unit commanded by Gandhi operated for less than two months before being disbanded. 79 After the suppression of the rebellion the colonial establishment showed no interest in extending to the Indian community the civil rights granted to white South Africans . This led Gandhi to becoming disillusioned with the Empire and aroused a spiritual awakening within him; historian Arthur L. Herman wrote that Gandhis African experience was a part of his great disillusionment with the West transforming Gandhi into an uncompromising non-cooperator. 80 By 1910 Gandhis newspaper Indian Opinion was covering reports on discrimination against Africans by the colonial regime. Gandhi remarked that the Africans alone are the original inhabitants of the land. ... The whites on the other hand have occupied the land forcibly and appropriated it for themselves. 81 In 1910 Gandhi established with the help of his friend Hermann Kallenbach an idealistic community they named Tolstoy Farm near Johannesburg. 82 83 There Gandhi nurtured his policy of peaceful resistance. 84 In the years after black South Africans gained the right to vote in South Africa 1994 Gandhi was proclaimed a national hero with numerous monuments. 85 Struggle for Indian independence 19151947 See also: Indian independence movement At the request of Gopal Krishna Gokhale conveyed to Gandhi by C. F. Andrews Gandhi returned to India in 1915. He brought an international reputation as a leading Indian nationalist theorist and community organiser. Gandhi joined the Indian National Congress and was introduced to Indian issues politics and the Indian people primarily by Gokhale. Gokhale was a key leader of the Congress Party best known for his restraint and moderation and his insistence on working inside the system. Gandhi took Gokhales liberal approach based on British Whiggish traditions and transformed it to make it look Indian. 86 Gandhi took leadership of the Congress in 1920 and began escalating demands until on 26 January 1930 the Indian National Congress declared the independence of India. The British did not recognise the declaration but negotiations ensued with the Congress taking a role in provincial government in the late 1930s. Gandhi and the Congress withdrew their support of the Raj when the Viceroy declared war on Germany in September 1939 without consultation. Tensions escalated until Gandhi demanded immediate independence in 1942 and the British responded by imprisoning him and tens of thousands of Congress leaders. Meanwhile the Muslim League did co-operate with Britain and moved against Gandhis strong opposition to demands for a totally separate Muslim state of Pakistan. In August 1947 the British partitioned the land with India and Pakistan each achieving independence on terms that Gandhi disapproved. 87 Role in World War I See also: The role of India in World War I In April 1918 during the latter part of World War I the Viceroy invited Gandhi to a War Conference in Delhi. 88 Gandhi agreed to support the war effort. 39 89 In contrast to the Zulu War of 1906 and the outbreak of World War I in 1914 when he recruited volunteers for the Ambulance Corps this time Gandhi attempted to recruit combatants. In a June 1918 leaflet entitled Appeal for Enlistment Gandhi wrote: To bring about such a state of things we should have the ability to defend ourselves that is the ability to bear arms and to use them... If we want to learn the use of arms with the greatest possible despatch it is our duty to enlist ourselves in the army. 90 However Gandhi stipulated in a letter to the Viceroys private secretary that he personally will not kill or injure anybody friend or foe. 91 Gandhis support for the war campaign brought into question his consistency on nonviolence. Gandhis private secretary noted that The question of the consistency between his creed of Ahimsa nonviolence and his recruiting campaign was raised not only then but has been discussed ever since. 89 According to political and educational scientist Christian Bartolf Gandhis support for the war stemmed from his belief that true ahimsa could not exist simultaneously with cowardice. Therefore Gandhi felt that Indians needed to be willing and capable of using arms before they voluntarily chose non-violence. 92 In July 1918 Gandhi said that he could not persuade even one individual to enlist for the world war. So far I have not a single recruit to my credit apart Gandhi wrote. He added: They object because they fear to die. 93 Champaran agitations Main article: Champaran Satyagraha Gandhi in 1918 at the time of the Kheda and Champaran Satyagrahas Gandhis first major achievement came in 1917 with the Champaran agitation in Bihar . The Champaran agitation pitted the local peasantry against largely Anglo-Indian plantation owners who were backed by the local administration. The peasants were forced to grow indigo Indigofera sp. a cash crop for Indigo dye whose demand had been declining over two decades and were forced to sell their crops to the planters at a fixed price. Unhappy with this the peasantry appealed to Gandhi at his ashram in Ahmedabad. Pursuing a strategy of nonviolent protest Gandhi took the administration by surprise and won concessions from the authorities. 94 Kheda agitations Main article: Kheda Satyagraha In 1918 Kheda was hit by floods and famine and the peasantry was demanding relief from taxes. Gandhi moved his headquarters to Nadiad 95 organising scores of supporters and fresh volunteers from the region the most notable being Vallabhbhai Patel . 96 Using non-co-operation as a technique Gandhi initiated a signature campaign where peasants pledged non-payment of revenue even under the threat of confiscation of land. A social boycott of mamlatdars and talatdars revenue officials within the district accompanied the agitation. Gandhi worked hard to win public support for the agitation across the country. For five months the administration refused but by the end of May 1918 the government gave way on important provisions and relaxed the conditions of payment of revenue tax until the famine ended. In Kheda Vallabhbhai Patel represented the farmers in negotiations with the British who suspended revenue collection and released all the prisoners. 97 Khilafat movement Main article: Khilafat Movement In 1919 following World War I Gandhi aged 49 sought political co-operation from Muslims in his fight against British imperialism by supporting the Ottoman Empire that had been defeated in the World War. Before this initiative of Gandhi communal disputes and religious riots between Hindus and Muslims were common in British India such as the riots of 191718. Gandhi had already vocally supported the British crown in the first world war. 98 This decision of Gandhi was in part motivated by the British promise to reciprocate the help with swaraj self-government to Indians after the end of World War I. 99 The British government had offered instead of self-government minor reforms instead disappointing Gandhi. 100 He announced his satyagraha civil disobedience intentions. The British colonial officials made their counter move by passing the Rowlatt Act to block Gandhis movement. The Act allowed the British government to treat civil disobedience participants as criminals and gave it the legal basis to arrest anyone for preventive indefinite detention incarceration without judicial review or any need for a trial. 101 Gandhi felt that Hindu-Muslim co-operation was necessary for political progress against the British. He leveraged the Khilafat movement wherein Sunni Muslims in India their leaders such as the sultans of princely states in India and Ali brothers championed the Turkish Caliph as a solidarity symbol of Sunni Islamic community ummah . They saw the Caliph as their means to support Islam and the Islamic law after the defeat of Ottoman Empire in World War I. 102 103 104 Gandhis support to the Khilafat movement led to mixed results. It initially led to a strong Muslim support for Gandhi. However the Hindu leaders including Rabindranath Tagore questioned Gandhis leadership because they were largely against recognising or supporting the Sunni Islamic Caliph in Turkey. d The increasing Muslim support for Gandhi after he championed the Caliphs cause temporarily stopped the Hindu-Muslim communal violence. It offered evidence of inter-communal harmony in joint Rowlatt satyagraha demonstration rallies raising Gandhis stature as the political leader to the British. 108 109 His support for the Khilafat movement also helped Gandhi sideline Muhammad Ali Jinnah who had announced his opposition to the satyagraha non-co-operation movement approach of Gandhi. Jinnah began creating his independent support and later went on to lead the demand for West and East Pakistan. Though they agreed in general terms on Indian independence they disagreed on the means of achieving this. Jinnah was mainly interested in dealing with the British via constitutional negotiation rather than attempting to agitate the masses. 110 111 112 In 1922 the Khilafat movement gradually collapsed following the end of the non-cooperation movement with the arrest of Gandhi. 113 A number of Muslim leaders and delegates abandoned Gandhi and Congress. 114 Hindu-Muslim communal conflicts reignited and deadly religious riots re-appeared in numerous cities with 91 in United Provinces of Agra and Oudh alone. 115 116 Non-co-operation Main article: Non-co-operation movement With his book Hind Swaraj 1909 Gandhi aged 40 declared that British rule was established in India with the co-operation of Indians and had survived only because of this co-operation. If Indians refused to co-operate British rule would collapse and swaraj Indian independence would come. 6 117 Gandhi with Annie Besant en route to a meeting in Madras in September 1921. Earlier in Madurai on 21 September 1921 Gandhi had adopted the loin-cloth for the first time as a symbol of his identification with Indias poor. In February 1919 Gandhi cautioned the Viceroy of India with a cable communication that if the British were to pass the Rowlatt Act he would appeal to Indians to start civil disobedience. 118 The British government ignored him and passed the law stating it would not yield to threats. The satyagraha civil disobedience followed with people assembling to protest the Rowlatt Act. On 30 March 1919 British law officers opened fire on an assembly of unarmed people peacefully gathered participating in satyagraha in Delhi. 118 People rioted in retaliation. On 6 April 1919 a Hindu festival day Gandhi asked a crowd to remember not to injure or kill British people but to express their frustration with peace to boycott British goods and burn any British clothing they owned. He emphasised the use of non-violence to the British and towards each other even if the other side used violence. Communities across India announced plans to gather in greater numbers to protest. Government warned him not to enter Delhi but Gandhi defied the order and was arrested on 9 April. 118 On 13 April 1919 people including women with children gathered in an Amritsar park and British Indian Army officer Reginald Dyer surrounded them and ordered troops under his command to fire on them. The resulting Jallianwala Bagh massacre or Amritsar massacre of hundreds of Sikh and Hindu civilians enraged the subcontinent but was supported by some Britons and parts of the British media as a necessary response. Gandhi in Ahmedabad on the day after the massacre in Amritsar did not criticise the British and instead criticised his fellow countrymen for not exclusively using love to deal with the hate of the British government. 118 Gandhi demanded that the Indian people stop all violence stop all property destruction and went on fast-to-death to pressure Indians to stop their rioting. 119 The massacre and Gandhis non-violent response to it moved many but also made some Sikhs and Hindus upset that Dyer was getting away with murder. Investigation committees were formed by the British which Gandhi asked Indians to boycott. 118 The unfolding events the massacre and the British response led Gandhi to the belief that Indians will never get a fair equal treatment under British rulers and he shifted his attention to swaraj and political independence for India. 120 In 1921 Gandhi was the leader of the Indian National Congress. 104 He reorganised the Congress. With Congress now behind Gandhi and Muslim support triggered by his backing the Khilafat movement to restore the Caliph in Turkey 104 Gandhi had the political support and the attention of the British Raj . 107 101 103 Gandhi spinning yarn Gandhi expanded his nonviolent non-co-operation platform to include the swadeshi policy the boycott of foreign-made goods especially British goods. Linked to this was his advocacy that khadi homespun cloth be worn by all Indians instead of British-made textiles. Gandhi exhorted Indian men and women rich or poor to spend time each day spinning khadi in support of the independence movement. 121 In addition to boycotting British products Gandhi urged the people to boycott British institutions and law courts to resign from government employment and to forsake British titles and honours . Gandhi thus began his journey aimed at crippling the British India government economically politically and administratively. 122 The appeal of Non-cooperation grew its social popularity drew participation from all strata of Indian society. Gandhi was arrested on 10 March 1922 tried for sedition and sentenced to six years imprisonment. He began his sentence on 18 March 1922. With Gandhi isolated in prison the Indian National Congress split into two factions one led by Chitta Ranjan Das and Motilal Nehru favouring party participation in the legislatures and the other led by Chakravarti Rajagopalachari and Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel opposing this move. 123 Furthermore co-operation among Hindus and Muslims ended as Khilafat movement collapsed with the rise of Ataturk in Turkey. Muslim leaders left the Congress and began forming Muslim organisations. The political base behind Gandhi had broken into factions. He was released in February 1924 for an appendicitis operation having served only two years. 124 125 Salt Satyagraha Salt MarchCivil Disobedience Movement Main article: Salt Satyagraha Original footage of Gandhi and his followers marching to Dandi in the Salt Satyagraha After his early release from prison for political crimes in 1924 Gandhi continued to pursue swaraj over the second half of the 1920s. He pushed through a resolution at the Calcutta Congress in December 1928 calling on the British government to grant India dominion status or face a new campaign of non-cooperation with complete independence for the country as its goal. 126 After Gandhis support for World War I with Indian combat troops and the failure of Khilafat movement in preserving the rule of Caliph in Turkey followed by a collapse in Muslim support for his leadership some such as Subhas Chandra Bose and Bhagat Singh questioned his values and non-violent approach. 103 127 While many Hindu leaders championed a demand for immediate independence Gandhi revised his own call to a one-year wait instead of two. 126 The British did not respond favourably to Gandhis proposal. British political leaders such as Lord Birkenhead and Winston Churchill announced opposition to the appeasers of Gandhi in their discussions with European diplomats who sympathised with Indian demands. 128 On 31 December 1929 an Indian flag was unfurled in Lahore . Gandhi led Congress in a celebration on 26 January 1930 of Indias Independence Day in Lahore. This day was commemorated by almost every other Indian organisation. Gandhi then launched a new Satyagraha against the British salt tax in March 1930. He sent an ultimatum in the form of a letter personally addressed to Lord Irwin the viceroy of India on 2 March. Gandhi condemned British rule in the letter describing it as a curse that has impoverished the dumb millions by a system of progressive exploitation and by a ruinously expensive military and civil administration... It has reduced us politically to serfdom. Gandhi also mentioned in the letter that the viceroy received a salary over five thousand times Indias average income. In the letter Gandhi also stressed his continued adherence to non-violent forms of protest. 129 This was highlighted by the Salt March to Dandi from 12 March to 6 April where together with 78 volunteers Gandhi marched 388 kilometres 241 mi from Ahmedabad to Dandi Gujarat to make salt himself with the declared intention of breaking the salt laws. The march took 25 days to cover 240 miles with Gandhi speaking to often huge crowds along the way. Thousands of Indians joined him in Dandi. According to Sarma Gandhi recruited women to participate in the salt tax campaigns and the boycott of foreign products which gave many women a new self-confidence and dignity in the mainstream of Indian public life. 130 However other scholars such as Marilyn French state that Gandhi barred women from joining his civil disobedience movement because Gandhi feared he would be accused of using women as a political shield. 131 When women insisted on joining the movement and participating in public demonstrations Gandhi asked the volunteers to get permissions of their guardians and only those women who can arrange child-care should join him. 132 Regardless of Gandhis apprehensions and views Indian women joined the Salt March by the thousands to defy the British salt taxes and monopoly on salt mining. On 5 May Gandhi was interned under a regulation dating from 1827 in anticipation of a protest that he had planned. The protest at Dharasana salt works on 21 May went ahead without Gandhi. A horrified American journalist Webb Miller described the British response thus: In complete silence the Gandhi men drew up and halted a hundred yards from the stockade. A picked column advanced from the crowd waded the ditches and approached the barbed wire stockade... at a word of command scores of native policemen rushed upon the advancing marchers and rained blows on their heads with their steel-shot lathis long bamboo sticks. Not one of the marchers even raised an arm to fend off blows. They went down like ninepins. From where I stood I heard the sickening whack of the clubs on unprotected skulls... Those struck down fell sprawling unconscious or writhing with fractured skulls or broken shoulders. 133 This went on for hours until some 300 or more protesters had been beaten many seriously injured and two killed. At no time did they offer any resistance. After Gandhis arrest the women marched and picketed shops on their own accepting violence and verbal abuse from British authorities for the cause in the manner Gandhi inspired. 131 This campaign was one of Gandhis most successful at upsetting British hold on India; Britain responded by imprisoning over 60 000 people. 134 However Congress estimates put the figure at 90 000. Among them was one of Gandhis lieutenants Jawaharlal Nehru . Gandhi as folk hero Indian workers on strike in support of Gandhi in 1930 Indian Congress in the 1920s appealed to Andhra Pradesh peasants by creating Telugu language plays that combined Indian mythology and legends linked them to Gandhis ideas and portrayed Gandhi as a messiah a reincarnation of ancient and medieval Indian nationalist leaders and saints. The plays built support among peasants steeped in traditional Hindu culture according to Murali and this effort made Gandhi a folk hero in Telugu speaking villages a sacred messiah-like figure. 135 According to Dennis Dalton it was Gandhis ideas that were responsible for his wide following. Gandhi criticised Western civilisation as one driven by brute force and immorality contrasting it with his categorisation of Indian civilisation as one driven by soul force and morality. 136 Gandhi captured the imagination of the people of his heritage with his ideas about winning hate with love. These ideas are evidenced in his pamphlets from the 1890s in South Africa where too Gandhi was popular among the Indian indentured workers . After he returned to India people flocked to Gandhi because he reflected their values. 136 Gandhis first visit to Odisha in 1921 a general meeting held at the riverbed of Kathajodi Gandhi also campaigned hard going from one rural corner of the Indian subcontinent to another. He used terminology and phrases such as Rama -rajya from Ramayana Prahlada as a paradigmatic icon and such cultural symbols as another facet of swaraj and satyagraha . 137 During Gandhis lifetime these ideas sounded strange outside India but they readily and deeply resonated with the culture and historic values of his people. 136 138 Negotiations The government represented by Lord Irwin decided to negotiate with Gandhi. The GandhiIrwin Pact was signed in March 1931. The British Government agreed to free all political prisoners in return for the suspension of the civil disobedience movement. According to the pact Gandhi was invited to attend the Round Table Conference in London for discussions and as the sole representative of the Indian National Congress. The conference was a disappointment to Gandhi and the nationalists. Gandhi expected to discuss Indias independence while the British side focused on the Indian princes and Indian minorities rather than on a transfer of power. Lord Irwins successor Lord Willingdon took a hard line against India as an independent nation began a new campaign of controlling and subduing the nationalist movement. Gandhi was again arrested and the government tried and failed to negate his influence by completely isolating him from his followers. 139 In Britain Winston Churchill a prominent Conservative politician who was then out of office but later became its prime minister became a vigorous and articulate critic of Gandhi and opponent of his long-term plans. Churchill often ridiculed Gandhi saying in a widely reported 1931 speech: It is alarming and also nauseating to see Mr Gandhi a seditious Middle Temple lawyer now posing as a fakir of a type well known in the East striding half-naked up the steps of the Vice-regal palace....to parley on equal terms with the representative of the King-Emperor. 140 Churchills bitterness against Gandhi grew in the 1930s. He called Gandhi as the one who was seditious in aim whose evil genius and multiform menace was attacking the British empire. Churchill called him a dictator a Hindu Mussolini fomenting a race war trying to replace the Raj with Brahmin cronies playing on the ignorance of Indian masses all for selfish gain. 141 Churchill attempted to isolate Gandhi and his criticism of Gandhi was widely covered by European and American press. It gained Churchill sympathetic support but it also increased support for Gandhi among Europeans. The developments heightened Churchills anxiety that the British themselves would give up out of pacifism and misplaced conscience. 141 Round Table Conferences Gandhi and his personal assistant Mahadev Desai at Birla House 1939 During the discussions between Gandhi and the British government over 193132 at the Round Table Conferences Gandhi now aged about 62 sought constitutional reforms as a preparation to the end of colonial British rule and begin the self-rule by Indians. 142 The British side sought reforms that would keep the Indian subcontinent as a colony. The British negotiators proposed constitutional reforms on a British Dominion model that established separate electorates based on religious and social divisions. The British questioned the Congress party and Gandhis authority to speak for all of India. 143 They invited Indian religious leaders such as Muslims and Sikhs to press their demands along religious lines as well as B. R. Ambedkar as the representative leader of the untouchables. 142 Gandhi vehemently opposed a constitution that enshrined rights or representations based on communal divisions because he feared that it would not bring people together but divide them perpetuate their status and divert the attention from Indias struggle to end the colonial rule. 144 145 The Second Round Table conference was the only time Gandhi left India between 1914 and his death in 1948. Gandhi declined the governments offer of accommodation in an expensive West End hotel preferring to stay in the East End to live among working-class people as he did in India. 146 Gandhi based himself in a small cell-bedroom at Kingsley Hall for the three-month duration of his stay and was enthusiastically received by East Enders. 147 During this time Gandhi renewed his links with the British vegetarian movement . An admiring East End crowd gathers to witness the arrival of Mahatma Gandhi 1931 After Gandhi returned from the Second Round Table conference he started a new satyagraha . Gandhi was arrested and imprisoned at the Yerwada Jail Pune. While he was in prison the British government enacted a new law that granted untouchables a separate electorate. It came to be known as the Communal Award . 148 In protest Gandhi started a fast-unto-death while he was held in prison. 149 The resulting public outcry forced the government in consultations with Ambedkar to replace the Communal Award with a compromise Poona Pact . 150 151 Congress politics In 1934 Gandhi resigned from Congress party membership. He did not disagree with the partys position but felt that if he resigned Gandhis popularity with Indians would cease to stifle the partys membership which actually varied including communists socialists trade unionists students religious conservatives and those with pro-business convictions and that these various voices would get a chance to make themselves heard. Gandhi also wanted to avoid being a target for Raj propaganda by leading a party that had temporarily accepted political accommodation with the Raj. 152 In 1936 Gandhi returned to active politics again with the Nehru presidency and the Lucknow session of the Congress. Although Gandhi wanted a total focus on the task of winning independence and not speculation about Indias future he did not restrain the Congress from adopting socialism as its goal. Gandhi had a clash with Subhas Chandra Bose who had been elected president in 1938 and who had previously expressed a lack of faith in nonviolence as a means of protest. 153 Despite Gandhis opposition Bose won a second term as Congress President against Gandhis nominee Bhogaraju Pattabhi Sitaramayya . Gandhi declared that Sitaramayyas defeat was his defeat. 154 Bose later left the Congress when the All-India leaders resigned en masse in protest of his abandonment of the principles introduced by Gandhi. 155 156 World War II and Quit India movement Main article: Quit India Movement Gandhi talking with Jawaharlal Nehru his designated political heir during the drafting of the Quit India Resolution in Bombay August 1942 Gandhi opposed providing any help to the British war effort and he campaigned against any Indian participation in World War II . 157 The British government responded with the arrests of Gandhi and many other Congress leaders and killed over 1 000 Indians who participated in this movement. 158 A number of violent attacks were also carried out by the nationalists against the British government. 159 While Gandhis campaign did not enjoy the support of a number of Indian leaders and over 2.5 million Indians volunteered and joined the British military to fight on various fronts of the Allied Forces the movement played a role in weakening the control over the South Asian region by the British regime and it ultimately paved the way for Indian independence. 157 159 Gandhis opposition to the Indian participation in World War II was motivated by his belief that India could not be party to a war ostensibly being fought for democratic freedom while that freedom was denied to India itself. 160 Gandhi also condemned Nazism and Fascism a view which won endorsement of other Indian leaders. As the war progressed Gandhi intensified his demand for independence calling for the British to Quit India in a 1942 speech in Mumbai. 161 This was Gandhis and the Congress Partys most definitive revolt aimed at securing the British exit from India. 162 The British government responded quickly to the Quit India speech and within hours after Gandhis speech arrested Gandhi and all the members of the Congress Working Committee. 163 His countrymen retaliated the arrests by damaging or burning down hundreds of government owned railway stations police stations and cutting down telegraph wires. 164 In 1942 Gandhi now nearing age 73 urged his people to completely stop co-operating with the imperial government. In this effort Gandhi urged that they neither kill nor injure British people but be willing to suffer and die if violence is initiated by the British officials. 161 He clarified that the movement would not be stopped because of any individual acts of violence saying that the ordered anarchy of the present system of administration was worse than real anarchy. 165 166 Gandhi urged Indians to karo ya maro do or die in the cause of their rights and freedoms. 161 167 Gandhi in 1942 the year he launched the Quit India Movement Gandhis arrest lasted two years as he was held in the Aga Khan Palace in Pune . During this period Gandhis longtime secretary Mahadev Desai died of a heart attack his wife Kasturba died after 18 months imprisonment on 22 February 1944 and Gandhi suffered a severe malaria attack. 164 While in jail he agreed to an interview with Stuart Gelder a British journalist. Gelder then composed and released an interview summary cabled it to the mainstream press that announced sudden concessions Gandhi was willing to make comments that shocked his countrymen the Congress workers and even Gandhi. The latter two claimed that it distorted what Gandhi actually said on a range of topics and falsely repudiated the Quit India movement. 164 Gandhi was released before the end of the war on 6 May 1944 because of his failing health and necessary surgery; the Raj did not want him to die in prison and enrage the nation. Gandhi came out of detention to an altered political scene the Muslim League for example which a few years earlier had appeared marginal now occupied the centre of the political stage 168 and the topic of Jinnahs campaign for Pakistan was a major talking point. Gandhi and Jinnah had extensive correspondence and the two men met several times over a period of two weeks in September 1944 at Jinnahs house in Bombay where Gandhi insisted on a united religiously plural and independent India which included Muslims and non-Muslims of the Indian subcontinent coexisting. Jinnah rejected this proposal and insisted instead for partitioning the subcontinent on religious lines to create a separate Muslim homeland later Pakistan. 169 These discussions continued through 1947. 170 While the leaders of Congress languished in jail the other parties supported the war and gained organisational strength. Underground publications flailed at the ruthless suppression of Congress but it had little control over events. 171 At the end of the war the British gave clear indications that power would be transferred to Indian hands. At this point Gandhi called off the struggle and around 100 000 political prisoners were released including the Congresss leadership. 172 Partition and independence See also: Indian independence movement and Partition of India Gandhi with Muhammad Ali Jinnah in September 1944 Gandhi with Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy left and Sheikh Mujibur Rahman far right during Noakhali riots in October 1946 Gandhi opposed the partition of the Indian subcontinent along religious lines. 169 173 174 The Indian National Congress and Gandhi called for the British to Quit India . However the All-India Muslim League demanded Divide and Quit India. 175 176 Gandhi suggested an agreement which required the Congress and the Muslim League to co-operate and attain independence under a provisional government thereafter the question of partition could be resolved by a plebiscite in the districts with a Muslim majority. 177 Jinnah rejected Gandhis proposal and called for Direct Action Day on 16 August 1946 to press Muslims to publicly gather in cities and support his proposal for the partition of the Indian subcontinent into a Muslim state and non-Muslim state. Huseyn Shaheed Suhrawardy the Muslim League Chief Minister of Bengal now Bangladesh and West Bengal excluding Cooch Behar gave Calcuttas police special holiday to celebrate the Direct Action Day. 178 The Direct Action Day triggered a mass murder of Calcutta Hindus and the torching of their property and holidaying police were missing to contain or stop the conflict. 179 The British government did not order its army to move in to contain the violence. 178 The violence on Direct Action Day led to retaliatory violence against Muslims across India. Thousands of Hindus and Muslims were murdered and tens of thousands were injured in the cycle of violence in the days that followed. 180 Gandhi visited the most riot-prone areas to appeal a stop to the massacres. 179 Gandhi center in 1947 with Louis Mountbatten Britains last Viceroy of India and his wife Edwina Mountbatten Archibald Wavell the Viceroy and Governor-General of British India for three years through February 1947 had worked with Gandhi and Jinnah to find a common ground before and after accepting Indian independence in principle. Wavell condemned Gandhis character and motives as well as his ideas. Wavell accused Gandhi of harbouring the single-minded idea to overthrow British rule and influence and to establish a Hindu raj and called Gandhi a malignant malevolent exceedingly shrewd politician. 181 Wavell feared a civil war on the Indian subcontinent and doubted Gandhi would be able to stop it. 181 The British reluctantly agreed to grant independence to the people of the Indian subcontinent but accepted Jinnahs proposal of partitioning the land into Pakistan and India. Gandhi was involved in the final negotiations but Stanley Wolpert states the plan to carve up British India was never approved of or accepted by Gandhi . 182 The partition was controversial and violently disputed. More than half a million were killed in religious riots as 10 million to 12 million non-Muslims Hindus and Sikhs mostly migrated from Pakistan into India and Muslims migrated from India into Pakistan across the newly created borders of India West Pakistan and East Pakistan. 183 Gandhi spent the day of independence not celebrating the end of the British rule but appealing for peace among his countrymen by fasting and spinning in Calcutta on 15 August 1947. The partition had gripped the Indian subcontinent with religious violence and the streets were filled with corpses. 184 Gandhis fasting and protests are credited for stopping the religious riots and communal violence. 181 185 186 187 188 189 190 191 192 Death Main article: Assassination of Mahatma Gandhi At 5:17 p.m. on 30 January 1948 Gandhi was with his grandnieces in the garden of Birla House now Gandhi Smriti on his way to address a prayer meeting when Nathuram Godse a Hindu nationalist fired three bullets into Gandhis chest from a pistol at close range. 193 194 According to some accounts Gandhi died instantly. 195 196 In other accounts such as one prepared by an eyewitness journalist Gandhi was carried into the Birla House into a bedroom. There he died about 30 minutes later as one of Gandhis family members read verses from Hindu scriptures. 197 198 199 200 185 Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru addressed his countrymen over the All-India Radio saying: 201 Friends and comrades the light has gone out of our lives and there is darkness everywhere and I do not quite know what to tell you or how to say it. Our beloved leader Bapu as we called him the father of the nation is no more. Perhaps I am wrong to say that; nevertheless we will not see him again as we have seen him for these many years we will not run to him for advice or seek solace from him and that is a terrible blow not only for me but for millions and millions in this country. 202 Memorial at the location of Gandhis assassination in 1948. His stylised footsteps lead to the memorial. Godse a Hindu nationalist 203 194 204 with links to the Hindu Mahasabha and the Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh 205 206 207 208 185 made no attempt to escape; several other conspirators were soon arrested as well. The accused were Nathuram Vinayak Godse Narayan Apte Vinayak Damodar Savarkar Shankar Kistayya Dattatraya Parchure Vishnu Karkare Madanlal Pahwa and Gopal Godse . 185 208 209 210 211 212 The trial began on 27 May 1948 and ran for eight months before Justice Atma Charan passed his final order on 10 February 1949. The prosecution called 149 witnesses the defence none. 213 The court found all of the defendants except one guilty as charged. Eight men were convicted for the murder conspiracy and others were convicted for violation of the Explosive Substances Act. Savarkar was acquitted and set free. Nathuram Godse and Narayan Apte were sentenced to death by hanging 214 while the remaining six including Godses brother Gopal were sentenced to life imprisonment . 215 Funeral and memorials Gandhis funeral was marked by millions of Indians. 216 Gandhis death was mourned nationwide. 198 199 200 185 Over a million people joined the five-mile-long funeral procession that took over five hours to reach Raj Ghat from Birla house where Gandhi was assassinated and another million watched the procession pass by. 216 His body was transported on a weapons carrier whose chassis was dismantled overnight to allow a high-floor to be installed so that people could catch a glimpse of Gandhis body. The engine of the vehicle was not used; instead four drag-ropes held by 50 people each pulled the vehicle. 217 All Indian-owned establishments in London remained closed in mourning as thousands of people from all faiths and denominations and Indians from all over Britain converged at India House in London. 218 Cremation of Mahatma Gandhi at Rajghat 31 January 1948. It was attended by Jawaharlal Nehru Louis and Edwina Mountbatten Maulana Azad Rajkumari Amrit Kaur Sarojini Naidu and other national leaders. His son Devdas Gandhi lit the pyre. 219 Gandhi was cremated in accordance with Hindu tradition. His ashes were poured into urns which were sent across India for memorial services. 220 Most of the ashes were immersed at the Sangam at Allahabad on 12 February 1948 but some were secretly taken away. In 1997 Tushar Gandhi immersed the contents of one urn found in a bank vault and reclaimed through the courts at the Sangam at Allahabad. 221 222 Some of Gandhis ashes were scattered at the source of the Nile River near Jinja Uganda and a memorial plaque marks the event. On 30 January 2008 the contents of another urn were immersed at Girgaum Chowpatty . Another urn is at the palace of the Aga Khan in Pune where Gandhi was held as a political prisoner from 1942 to 1944 223 224 and another in the Self-Realization Fellowship Lake Shrine in Los Angeles. 221 225 226 The Birla House site where Gandhi was assassinated is now a memorial called Gandhi Smriti. The place near Yamuna River where he was cremated is the Raj Ghat memorial in New Delhi. 227 A black marble platform it bears the epigraph He Rama Devanagari : ! or Hey Raam . These are said to be Gandhis last words after he was shot. 228 Principles practices and beliefs Main article: Practices and beliefs of Mahatma Gandhi See also: Gandhism Gandhis spirituality was greatly based on his embracement of the five great vows of Jainism and Hindu Yoga philosophy viz. Satya truth ahimsa nonviolence brahmacharya celibacy asteya non-stealing and aparigraha non-attachment. 229 He stated that Unless you impose on yourselves the five vows you may not embark on the experiment at all. 229 Gandhis statements letters and life have attracted much political and scholarly analysis of his principles practices and beliefs including what influenced him. Some writers present Gandhi as a paragon of ethical living and pacifism while others present him as a more complex contradictory and evolving character influenced by his culture and circumstances. 230 231 Truth and Satyagraha Plaque displaying one of Gandhis quotes on rumour Gandhi dedicated his life to discovering and pursuing truth or Satya and called his movement satyagraha which means appeal to insistence on or reliance on the Truth. 232 The first formulation of the satyagraha as a political movement and principle occurred in 1920 which Gandhi tabled as Resolution on Non-cooperation in September that year before a session of the Indian Congress. It was the satyagraha formulation and step states Dennis Dalton that deeply resonated with beliefs and culture of his people embedded him into the popular consciousness transforming him quickly into Mahatma. 233 God is truth. The way to truth lies through ahimsa nonviolence Sabarmati 13 March 1927 Gandhi based Satyagraha on the Vedantic ideal of self-realisation ahimsa nonviolence vegetarianism and universal love. William Borman states that the key to his satyagraha is rooted in the Hindu Upanishadic texts. 234 According to Indira Carr Gandhis ideas on ahimsa and satyagraha were founded on the philosophical foundations of Advaita Vedanta. 235 I. Bruce Watson states that some of these ideas are found not only in traditions within Hinduism but also in Jainism or Buddhism particularly those about non-violence vegetarianism and universal love but Gandhis synthesis was to politicise these ideas. 236 His concept of satya as a civil movement states Glyn Richards are best understood in the context of the Hindu terminology of Dharma and Rta . 237 Gandhi stated that the most important battle to fight was overcoming his own demons fears and insecurities. Gandhi summarised his beliefs first when he said God is Truth. Gandhi would later change this statement to Truth is God. Thus satya truth in Gandhis philosophy is God . 238 Gandhi states Richards described the term God not as a separate power but as the Being Brahman Atman of the Advaita Vedanta tradition a nondual universal that pervades in all things in each person and all life. 237 According to Nicholas Gier this to Gandhi meant the unity of God and humans that all beings have the same one soul and therefore equality that atman exists and is same as everything in the universe ahimsa non-violence is the very nature of this atman . 239 Gandhi picking salt during Salt Satyagraha to defy colonial law giving salt collection monopoly to the British. 240 His satyagraha attracted vast numbers of Indian men and women. 241 The essence of Satyagraha is soul force as a political means refusing to use brute force against the oppressor seeking to eliminate antagonisms between the oppressor and the oppressed aiming to transform or purify the oppressor. It is not inaction but determined passive resistance and non-co-operation where states Arthur Herman love conquers hate . 242 A euphemism sometimes used for Satyagraha is that it is a silent force or a soul force a term also used by Martin Luther King Jr. during his I Have a Dream speech. It arms the individual with moral power rather than physical power. Satyagraha is also termed a universal force as it essentially makes no distinction between kinsmen and strangers young and old man and woman friend and foe. e Gandhi wrote: There must be no impatience no barbarity no insolence no undue pressure. If we want to cultivate a true spirit of democracy we cannot afford to be intolerant. Intolerance betrays want of faith in ones cause. 246 Civil disobedience and non-co-operation as practised under Satyagraha are based on the law of suffering 247 a doctrine that the endurance of suffering is a means to an end . This end usually implies a moral upliftment or progress of an individual or society. Therefore non-co-operation in Satyagraha is in fact a means to secure the co-operation of the opponent consistently with truth and justice . 248 While Gandhis idea of satyagraha as a political means attracted a widespread following among Indians the support was not universal. For example Muslim leaders such as Jinnah opposed the satyagraha idea accused Gandhi to be reviving Hinduism through political activism and began effort to counter Gandhi with Muslim nationalism and a demand for Muslim homeland. 249 250 251 The untouchability leader Ambedkar in June 1945 after his decision to convert to Buddhism and the first Law and Justice minister of modern India dismissed Gandhis ideas as loved by blind Hindu devotees primitive influenced by spurious brew of Tolstoy and Ruskin and there is always some simpleton to preach them . 252 253 254 Winston Churchill caricatured Gandhi as a cunning huckster seeking selfish gain an aspiring dictator and an atavistic spokesman of a pagan Hinduism. Churchill stated that the civil disobedience movement spectacle of Gandhi only increased the danger to which white people there British India are exposed. 255 Nonviolence Gandhi with textile workers at Darwen Lancashire 26 September 1931 Although Gandhi was not the originator of the principle of nonviolence he was the first to apply it in the political field on a large scale. 256 257 The concept of nonviolence ahimsa has a long history in Indian religious thought and is considered the highest dharma ethical valuevirtue a precept to be observed towards all living beings sarvbhuta at all times sarvada in all respects sarvatha in action words and thought. 258 Gandhi explains his philosophy and ideas about ahimsa as a political means in his autobiography The Story of My Experiments with Truth . 259 260 261 262 Although Gandhi considered non-violence to be infinitely superior to violence he preferred violence to cowardice. 263 264 Gandhi added that he would rather have India resort to arms in order to defend her honor than that she should in a cowardly manner become or remain a helpless witness to her own dishonor. 264 Literary works Young India a weekly journal published by Gandhi from 1919 to 1932 Gandhi was a prolific writer. His signature style was simple precise clear and as devoid of artificialities. 265 One of Gandhis earliest publications Hind Swaraj published in Gujarati in 1909 became the intellectual blueprint for Indias independence movement. The book was translated into English the next year with a copyright legend that read No Rights Reserved . 266 For decades Gandhi edited several newspapers including Harijan in Gujarati in Hindi and in the English language; Indian Opinion while in South Africa and Young India in English and Navajivan a Gujarati monthly on his return to India. Later Navajivan was also published in Hindi. Gandhi also wrote letters almost every day to individuals and newspapers. 267 Gandhi also wrote several books including his autobiography The Story of My Experiments with Truth Gujarati of which Gandhi bought the entire first edition to make sure it was reprinted. 268 His other autobiographies included: Satyagraha in South Africa about his struggle there Hind Swaraj or Indian Home Rule a political pamphlet and a paraphrase in Gujarati of John Ruskin s Unto This Last which was an early critique of political economy . 269 This last essay can be considered his programme on economics. Gandhi also wrote extensively on vegetarianism diet and health religion social reforms etc. Gandhi usually wrote in Gujarati though he also revised the Hindi and English translations of his books. 270 In 1934 Gandhi wrote Songs from Prison while prisoned in Yerawada jail in Maharashtra. 271 Gandhis complete works were published by the Indian government under the name The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi in the 1960s. The writings comprise about 50 000 pages published in about 100 volumes. In 2000 a revised edition of the complete works sparked a controversy as it contained a large number of errors and omissions. 272 The Indian government later withdrew the revised edition. 273 Legacy See also: List of artistic depictions of Mahatma Gandhi List of things named after Mahatma Gandhi and List of roads named after Mahatma Gandhi Gandhi is noted as the greatest figure of the successful Indian independence movement against the British rule. He is also hailed as the greatest figure of modern India. f American historian Stanley Wolpert described Gandhi as Indias greatest revolutionary nationalist leader and the greatest Indian since the Buddha . 280 In 1999 Gandhi was named Asian of the century by Asiaweek . 281 In a 2000 BBC poll he was voted as the greatest man of the millennium. 282 283 The word Mahatma while often mistaken for Gandhis given name in the West is taken from the Sanskrit words maha meaning Great and atma meaning Soul . 284 285 He was publicly bestowed with the honorific title Mahatma in July 1914 at farewell meeting in Town Hall Durban . 286 287 Rabindranath Tagore is said to have accorded the title to Gandhi by 1915. 288 g In his autobiography Gandhi nevertheless explains that he never valued the title and was often pained by it. 291 292 293 In 1961 the U.S. government issued two commemorative stamps in honour of Mahatma Gandhi. 294 Innumerable streets roads and localities in India are named after Gandhi. These include M.G.Road the main street of a number of Indian cities including Mumbai Bangalore Kolkata Lucknow Kanpur Gangtok and Indore Gandhi Market near Sion Mumbai and Gandhinagar the capital of the state of Gujarat Gandhis birthplace. 295 As of 2008 over 150 countries have released stamps on Gandhi. 296 In October 2019 about 87 countries including Turkey the United States Russia Iran Uzbekistan and Palestine released commemorative Gandhi stamps on the 150th anniversary of his birth. 297 298 299 300 Statue of Gandhi in the Roma Street Parkland Brisbane Australia. In 2014 Brisbanes Indian community commissioned a statue of Gandhi created by Ram V. Sutar and Anil Sutar in the Roma Street Parkland 301 302 It was unveiled by Narendra Modi then Prime Minister of India. Florian asteroid 120461 Gandhi was named in his honour in September 2020. 303 In October 2022 a statue of Gandhi was installed in Astana on the embankment of the rowing canal opposite the cult monument to the defenders of Kazakhstan. 304 On 15 December 2022 the United Nations headquarters in New York unveiled the statue of Gandhi. UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres called Gandhi an uncompromising advocate for peaceful co-existence. 305 Followers and international influence Gandhi influenced important leaders and political movements. 262 Leaders of the civil rights movement in the United States including Martin Luther King Jr. James Lawson and James Bevel drew from the writings of Gandhi in the development of their own theories about nonviolence. 306 307 308 King said Christ gave us the goals and Mahatma Gandhi the tactics. 309 King sometimes referred to Gandhi as the little brown saint. 310 Anti- apartheid activist and former President of South Africa Nelson Mandela was inspired by Gandhi. 311 Others include Steve Biko Vaclav Havel 312 and Aung San Suu Kyi . 313 Bust of Gandhi at York University Toronto Canada Statue of Gandhi in Madrid Spain Gandhi at Praca Tulio Fontoura Sao Paulo Brazil In his early years the former President of South Africa Nelson Mandela was a follower of the nonviolent resistance philosophy of Gandhi. 311 Bhana and Vahed commented on these events as Gandhi inspired succeeding generations of South African activists seeking to end White rule. This legacy connects him to Nelson Mandela...in a sense Mandela completed what Gandhi started. 314 Gandhis life and teachings inspired many who specifically referred to Gandhi as their mentor or who dedicated their lives to spreading his ideas. In Europe Romain Rolland was the first to discuss Gandhi in his 1924 book Mahatma Gandhi and Brazilian anarchist and feminist Maria Lacerda de Moura wrote about Gandhi in her work on pacifism. In 1931 physicist Albert Einstein exchanged letters with Gandhi and called him a role model for the generations to come in a letter writing about him. 315 Einstein said of Gandhi: Mahatma Gandhis life achievement stands unique in political history. He has invented a completely new and humane means for the liberation war of an oppressed country and practised it with greatest energy and devotion. The moral influence he had on the consciously thinking human being of the entire civilised world will probably be much more lasting than it seems in our time with its overestimation of brutal violent forces. Because lasting will only be the work of such statesmen who wake up and strengthen the moral power of their people through their example and educational works. We may all be happy and grateful that destiny gifted us with such an enlightened contemporary a role model for the generations to come. Generations to come will scarce believe that such a one as this walked the earth in flesh and blood. Farah Omar a political activist from Somaliland visited India in 1930 where he met Gandhi and was influenced by Gandhis non-violent philosophy which he adopted in his campaign in British Somaliland . 316 Lanza del Vasto went to India in 1936 intending to live with Gandhi; he later returned to Europe to spread Gandhis philosophy and founded the Community of the Ark in 1948 modelled after Gandhis ashrams. Madeleine Slade known as Mirabehn was the daughter of a British admiral who spent much of her adult life in India as a devotee of Gandhi. 317 318 In addition the British musician John Lennon referred to Gandhi when discussing his views on nonviolence. 319 In 2007 former US Vice-President and environmentalist Al Gore drew upon Gandhis idea of satyagraha in a speech on climate change. 320 44th President of the United States Barack Obama said in September 2009 that his biggest inspiration came from Gandhi. His reply was in response to the question: Who was the one person dead or live that you would choose to dine with? Obama added Hes somebody I find a lot of inspiration in. He inspired Dr. King with his message of nonviolence. He ended up doing so much and changed the world just by the power of his ethics. 321 Time magazine named The 14th Dalai Lama Lech Waesa Martin Luther King Jr. Cesar Chavez Aung San Suu Kyi Benigno Aquino Jr. Desmond Tutu and Nelson Mandela as Children of Gandhi and his spiritual heirs to nonviolence. 322 The Mahatma Gandhi District in Houston Texas United States an ethnic Indian enclave is officially named after Gandhi. 323 Gandhis ideas had a significant influence on 20th-century philosophy . It began with his engagement with Romain Rolland and Martin Buber . Jean-Luc Nancy said that the French philosopher Maurice Blanchot engaged critically with Gandhi from the point of view of European spirituality. 324 Since then philosophers including Hannah Arendt Etienne Balibar and Slavoj Zizek found that Gandhi was a necessary reference to discuss morality in politics. American political scientist Gene Sharp wrote an analytical text Gandhi as a political strategist on the significance of Gandhis ideas for creating nonviolent social change. Recently in the light of climate change Gandhis views on technology are gaining importance in the fields of environmental philosophy and philosophy of technology . 324 Global days that celebrate Gandhi In 2007 the United Nations General Assembly declared Gandhis birthday 2 October as the International Day of Nonviolence . 325 First proposed by UNESCO in 1948 as the School Day of Nonviolence and Peace DENIP in Spanish 326 30 January is observed as the School Day of Nonviolence and Peace in schools of many countries. 327 In countries with a Southern Hemisphere school calendar it is observed on 30 March. 327 Awards Time magazine named Gandhi the Man of the Year in 1930. 283 In the same magazines 1999 list of The Most Important People of the Century Gandhi was second only to Albert Einstein who had called Gandhi the greatest man of our age. 328 The University of Nagpur awarded him an LL.D. in 1937. 329 The Government of India awarded the annual Gandhi Peace Prize to distinguished social workers world leaders and citizens. Nelson Mandela the leader of South Africas struggle to eradicate racial discrimination and segregation was a prominent non-Indian recipient. In 2003 Gandhi was posthumously awarded with the World Peace Prize . 330 Two years later he was posthumously awarded with the Order of the Companions of O. R. Tambo . 331 In 2011 Gandhi topped the TIMEs list of top 25 political icons of all time. 332 Gandhi did not receive the Nobel Peace Prize although he was nominated five times between 1937 and 1948 including the first-ever nomination by the American Friends Service Committee 333 though Gandhi made the short list only twice in 1937 and 1947. 334 Decades later the Nobel Committee publicly declared its regret for the omission and admitted to deeply divided nationalistic opinion denying the award. 334 Gandhi was nominated in 1948 but was assassinated before nominations closed. That year the committee chose not to award the peace prize stating that there was no suitable living candidate and later research shows that the possibility of awarding the prize posthumously to Gandhi was discussed and that the reference to no suitable living candidate was to Gandhi. 334 Geir Lundestad Secretary of Norwegian Nobel Committee in 2006 said The greatest omission in our 106-year history is undoubtedly that Mahatma Gandhi never received the Nobel Peace prize. Gandhi could do without the Nobel Peace prize whether Nobel committee can do without Gandhi is the question. 335 When the 14th Dalai Lama was awarded the Prize in 1989 the chairman of the committee said that this was in part a tribute to the memory of Mahatma Gandhi. 334 In the summer of 1995 the North American Vegetarian Society inducted Gandhi posthumously into the Vegetarian Hall of Fame. 336 Father of the Nation Indians widely describe Gandhi as the Father of the Nation . 337 338 339 340 3 4 Origin of this title is traced back to a radio address on Singapore radio on 6 July 1944 by Subhash Chandra Bose where Bose addressed Gandhi as The Father of the Nation . 341 On 28 April 1947 Sarojini Naidu during a conference also referred Gandhi as Father of the Nation . 342 343 He is also conferred the title Bapu 340 Gujarati : endearment for father 3 papa 3 4 . Film theatre and literature A five-hour nine-minute long biographical documentary film 344 Mahatma: Life of Gandhi 18691948 made by Vithalbhai Jhaveri 345 in 1968 quoting Gandhis words and using black and white archival footage and photographs captures the history of those times. Ben Kingsley portrayed him in Richard Attenborough s 1982 film Gandhi 346 which won the Academy Award for Best Picture. It was based on the biography by Louis Fischer . 347 The 1996 film The Making of the Mahatma documented Gandhis time in South Africa and his transformation from an inexperienced barrister to recognised political leader. 348 Gandhi was a central figure in the 2006 comedy film Lage Raho Munna Bhai . Jahnu Baruas Maine Gandhi Ko Nahin Mara I did not kill Gandhi places contemporary society as a backdrop with its vanishing memory of Gandhis values as a metaphor for the senile forgetfulness of the protagonist of his 2005 film 349 writes Vinay Lal . 350 In the tale Le Jour du Jugement Dernier in the collection Les Memoires de Satan et autres contes loufoques by Pierre Cormon God tries to judge Gandhi at the Last Judgement but realises that the character is more complex than he appears. In 1967 Gandhi was set to be featured on the album cover of one of the best selling albums of The Beatles Sgt. Peppers Lonely Hearts Club Band however this idea was later cancelled due to respect for Gandhi. 351 The 1979 opera Satyagraha by American composer Philip Glass is loosely based on Gandhis life. 352 353 The operas libretto taken from the Bhagavad Gita is sung in the original Sanskrit . 354 The 1995 Marathi play Gandhi Virudh Gandhi explored the relationship between Gandhi and his son Harilal. The 2007 film Gandhi My Father was inspired on the same theme. The 1989 Marathi play Me Nathuram Godse Boltoy and the 1997 Hindi play Gandhi Ambedkar criticised Gandhi and his principles. 355 356 Several biographers have undertaken the task of describing Gandhis life. Among them are D. G. Tendulkar with his Mahatma. Life of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi in eight volumes Chaman Nahal s Gandhi Quartet and Pyarelal and Sushila Nayyar with their Mahatma Gandhi in 10 volumes. The 2010 biography Great Soul: Mahatma Gandhi and His Struggle With India by Joseph Lelyveld contained controversial material speculating about Gandhis sexual life. 357 Lelyveld however stated that the press coverage grossly distorts the overall message of the book. 358 The 2014 film Welcome Back Gandhi takes a fictionalised look at how Gandhi might react to modern day India. 359 The 2019 play Bharat Bhagya Vidhata inspired by Pujya Gurudevshri Rakeshbhai and produced by Sangeet Natak Akademi and Shrimad Rajchandra Mission Dharampur takes a look at how Gandhi cultivated the values of truth and non-violence. 360 Mahatma Gandhi is used by Cole Porter in his lyrics for the song Youre the Top which is included in the 1934 musical Anything Goes . In the song Porter rhymes Mahatma Gandhi with Napoleon Brandy. 361 Gandhi is mentioned in the Kris Kristofferson song They Killed Him . Current impact within India The Gandhi Mandapam a temple in Kanyakumari was erected in honour of Gandhi. India with its rapid economic modernisation and urbanisation has rejected Gandhis economics 362 but accepted much of his politics and continues to revere his memory. Reporter Jim Yardley notes that modern India is hardly a Gandhian nation if it ever was one. His vision of a village-dominated economy was shunted aside during his lifetime as rural romanticism and his call for a national ethos of personal austerity and nonviolence has proved antithetical to the goals of an aspiring economic and military power. By contrast Gandhi is given full credit for Indias political identity as a tolerant secular democracy. 363 Gandhis birthday 2 October is a national holiday in India Gandhi Jayanti . His image also appears on paper currency of all denominations issued by Reserve Bank of India except for the one rupee note . 364 Gandhis date of death 30 January is commemorated as a Martyrs Day in India. 365 There are three temples in India dedicated to Gandhi. 366 One is located at Sambalpur in Odisha the second at Nidaghatta village near Kadur in Chikmagalur district of Karnataka and the third at Chityal in the district of Nalgonda Telangana . 366 367 The Gandhi Memorial in Kanyakumari resembles central Indian Hindu temples and the Tamukkam or Summer Palace in Madurai now houses the Mahatma Gandhi Museum. 368 Descendants Not to be confused with the Indian political family NehruGandhi family . Family tree of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi and Kasturba Gandhi source: Gandhi Ashram Sabarmati Gandhis children and grandchildren live in India and other countries. Grandson Rajmohan Gandhi is a professor in Illinois and an author of Gandhis biography titled Mohandas 369 while another Tarun Gandhi has authored several authoritative books on his grandfather. Another grandson Kanu Ramdas Gandhi the son of Gandhis third son Ramdas was found living at an old age home in Delhi despite having taught earlier in the United States. 370 371 See also Religion portal Hinduism portal India portal Philosophy portal Gandhian socialism Gandhi cap Gandhi Teerth Gandhi International Research Institute and Museum for Gandhian study research on Mahatma Gandhi and dialogue Inclusive Christianity List of civil rights leaders List of peace activists Seven Social Sins a.k.a. Seven Blunders of the World Trikaranasuddhi Composite nationalism Abdul Ghaffar Khan Notes Explanatory notes Did not graduate Informal auditing student between 1888 and 1891 Pronounced variously n d i n d i GAHN -dee 1 Gujarati: monds kmtnd di 101 105 106 107 243 244 245 274 275 276 277 278 279 The earliest record of usage however is in a private letter from Pranjivan Mehta to Gopal Krishna Gokhale dated 1909. 289 290 Citations Gandhi . Archived 14 January 2015 at the Wayback Machine Random House Websters Unabridged Dictionary . K.P. Goswami 1971. Mahatma Gandhi:A Chronology . Publications Division Government of India. Entry for 9 July 1914. a b c d McAllister Pam 1982. Reweaving the Web of Life: Feminism and Nonviolence . New Society Publishers. p. 194 . ISBN 978-0-86571-017-7 . Retrieved 31 August 2013 . With love Yours Bapu You closed with the term of endearment used by your close friends the term you used with all the movement leaders roughly meaning Papa. Another letter written in 1940 shows similar tenderness and caring. a b c Eck Diana L. 2003. Encountering God: A Spiritual Journey from Bozeman to Banaras . Beacon Press . p. 210. ISBN 978-0-8070-7301-8 . Retrieved 31 August 2013 . ... his niece Manu who like others called this immortal Gandhi Bapu meaning not father but the familiar daddy. Gandhi Mohandas K. 2009. An Autobiography: The Story of My Experiments With Truth . The Floating Press. p. 21. ISBN 978-1-77541-405-6 . Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 . a b Ganguly Debjani; Docker John eds. 2008. Rethinking Gandhi and Nonviolent Relationality: Global Perspectives . Routledge . pp. 4. ISBN 978-1-134-07431-0 . Archived from the original on 21 July 2023 . Retrieved 21 July 2019 . ... marks Gandhi as a hybrid cosmopolitan figure who transformed ... anti-colonial nationalist politics in the twentieth-century in ways that neither indigenous nor westernized Indian nationalists could. a b c Guha 2015 pp. 1921. Misra Amalendu 2004. Identity and Religion: Foundations of anti-Islamism in India . Sage Publications. p. 67. ISBN 978-0-7619-3227-7 . Gandhi 2007a p. 5 . Malhotra S.L. 2001. Lawyer to Mahatma: Life Work and Transformation of M. K. Gandhi . Deep Deep Publications. p. 5. ISBN 978-81-7629-293-1 . Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 . Guha 2015 p. 21. Guha 2015 p. 512. Todd Anne M. 2012. Mohandas Gandhi . Infobase Publishing. p. 8. ISBN 978-1-4381-0662-5 . Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 . The name Gandhi means grocer although Mohandass father and grandfather were politicians not grocers. Gandhi 2008 pp. 13. a b c Guha 2015 pp. 2425. Kateshiya Gopal B 14 July 2024. Know Your City: Gandhis family house which witnessed his transformation from Mohan to Mahatma . The Indian Express . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 15 July 2024 . Guha 2015 p. 22. Sorokin Pitirim Aleksandrovich 2002. The Ways and Power of Love: types factors and techniques of moral transformation . Templeton Foundation Press. p. 169. ISBN 978-1-890151-86-7 . Rudolph Susanne Hoeber Rudolph Lloyd I. 1983. Gandhi: The Traditional Roots of Charisma . University of Chicago Press . p. 48. ISBN 978-0-226-73136-0 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 19 March 2023 . Guha 2014a p. 42 . The subcaste the Gandhis belonged to was known as Modh Bania the prefix apparently referring to the town of Modhera in Southern Gujarat. Renard John 1999. Responses to 101 Questions on Hinduism . Paulist Press. p. 139 . ISBN 978-0-8091-3845-6 . Retrieved 16 August 2020 . Gandhi 2008 pp. 2 8 269. a b Arvind Sharma 2013. Gandhi: A Spiritual Biography . Yale University Press . pp. 11 14. ISBN 978-0-300-18738-0 . Rudolph Susanne Hoeber Rudolph Lloyd I. 1983. Gandhi: The Traditional Roots of Charisma . University of Chicago Press. p. 17. ISBN 978-0-226-73136-0 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 . Gerard Toffin 2012. John Zavos; et al. eds.. Public Hinduisms . Sage Publications. pp. 24957. ISBN 978-81-321-1696-7 . Guha 2015 p. 23. Fischer Louis 1982. Gandhi his life and message for the world . New American Library. p. 96. ISBN 978-0-451-62142-9 . Guha 2015 pp. 2526. Ghose 1991 p. 4 . a b Mohanty Rekha 2011. From Satya to Sadbhavna PDF . Orissa Review January 2011: 4549. Archived from the original PDF on 1 January 2016 . Retrieved 23 February 2012 . Gandhi Mohandas K. 1940. At the High School . The Story of My Experiments with Truth . Wikilivres. Archived from the original on 7 March 2023 . Retrieved 20 February 2023 . Gandhi Mohandas K. 1940. Playing the Husband . The Story of My Experiments with Truth . Wikilivres. Archived from the original on 7 March 2023 . Retrieved 20 February 2023 . Guha 2015 pp. 2829. a b Guha 2015 p. 29. Gandhi M. K. 1 January 2009. An Autobiography: The Story of My Experiments With Truth . The Floating Press. pp. 6162. ISBN 978-1-77541-405-6 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 4 June 2020 . Guha 2015 p. 30. a b c Guha 2015 p. 32. Guha Ramachandra 2014. Gandhi Before India . Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-385-53229-7 . a b c d e f Gandhi Mohandas K. 1940. Preparation for England . The Story of My Experiments with Truth . Archived from the original on 2 July 2012. a b B. R. Nanda 2019 Mahatma Gandhi Encyclopdia Britannica archived from the original on 13 May 2017 retrieved 3 June 2017 Quote: Mahatma Gandhi byname of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi born October 2 1869 Porbandar India died January 30 1948 Delhi Indian lawyer politician ... a b Guha 2015 pp. 3334. Gandhi 2008 pp. 2021 . Guha Ramachandra 2014. Gandhi Before India . Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-385-53229-7 . Guha Ramachandra 2014. Gandhi Before India . Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-385-53229-7 . Swapnajit Mitra 12 October 2014. My Experiment with Truth . India Currents . Archived from the original on 16 January 2023 . Retrieved 16 January 2023 . Thomas Weber 2004. Gandhi as Disciple and Mentor . Cambridge University Press . pp. 19 25. ISBN 978-1-139-45657-9 . Narayan Hemchandra Gandhi Autobiography or The Story of My Experiments with Truth . www.mkgandhi.org . Archived from the original on 15 May 2021 . Retrieved 20 February 2023 . Tendulkar Dinanath Gopal 2 September 2008. Mahatma: 1920-1929 . the University of Michigan: Vithalbhai K. Javeri D.G. Tendulkar 1951. p. 463. a b c d Brown 1991 p. page needed . a b c d e Tendulkar D. G. 1951. Mahatma; life of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi . Delhi: Ministry of Information and Broadcasting Government of India. a b Shyness my shield . Autobiography . 1927. Archived from the original on 8 June 2019 . Retrieved 11 August 2019 . International Vegetarian Union Mohandas K. Gandhi 18691948 . ivu.org . Archived from the original on 5 December 2020 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 . a b Herman 2008 pp. 8283. Giliomee Hermann Mbenga Bernard 2007. 3 . In Roxanne Reid ed.. New History of South Africa 1st ed.. Tafelberg. p. 193. ISBN 978-0-624-04359-1 . a b Power Paul F. 1969. Gandhi in South Africa . The Journal of Modern African Studies . 7 3: 44155. doi : 10.1017S0022278X00018590 . ISSN 0022-278X . JSTOR 159062 . S2CID 154872727 . Keshavjee M.M. 2015. Into that Heaven of Freedom: The Impact of Apartheid on an Indian Familys Diasporic History . Mawenzi House Publishers Limited. ISBN 978-1-927494-27-1 . Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 . High Commission of India Pretoria South Africa : Mahatma Gandhi in South Africa . www.hcipretoria.gov.in . Archived from the original on 9 September 2024 . Retrieved 17 September 2024 . Parekh Bhikhu C. 2001. Gandhi: a very short introduction . Oxford University Press . p. 7. ISBN 978-0-19-285457-5 . a b c Dhiman 2016 pp. 2527. a b Gandhi 2002 p. page needed . Herman 2008 pp. 8788. Allen Jeremiah 2011. Sleeping with Strangers: A Vagabonds Journey Tramping the Globe . Other Places Publishing. p. 273. ISBN 978-1-935850-01-4 . Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 . a b Herman 2008 pp. 8889. March 1897 Memorial . The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi via Wikisource . : correspondence and newspaper accounts of the incident. Herman 2008 p. 125. Herman 2008 chapter 6. South African Medals that Mahatma Returned Put on View at Gandhi Mandap Exhibition PDF . Press Information Bureau of India Archive . 5 March 1949. Archived PDF from the original on 28 September 2020 . Retrieved 18 July 2020 . Rai Ajay Shanker 2000. Gandhian Satyagraha: An Analytical And Critical Approach . Concept Publishing Company. p. 35. ISBN 978-81-7022-799-1 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 3 June 2020 . Tolstoy Leo 14 December 1908. A Letter to A Hindu: The Subjection of India-Its Cause and Cure . The Literature Network . Archived from the original on 10 November 2006 . Retrieved 12 February 2012 . The Hindu Kural Parel Anthony J. 2002 Gandhi and Tolstoy in M. P. Mathai; M. S. John; Siby K. Joseph eds. Meditations on Gandhi : a Ravindra Varma festschrift New Delhi: Concept pp. 96112 ISBN 978-81-7022-961-2 retrieved 8 September 2012 Guha 2013a Ch. 22. DiSalvo Charles R. 2013. M.K. Gandhi Attorney at Law: The Man before the Mahatma . Univ of California Press. pp. 1415. ISBN 978-0-520-95662-9 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 15 November 2015 . Jones Constance; Ryan James 2007. Encyclopedia of Hinduism . New York: Facts On File. pp. 158159. ISBN 978-0-8160-5458-9 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 5 July 2024 . a b c d Desai Ashwin; Vahed Goolem 2015. The South African Gandhi: Stretcher-Bearer of Empire . Stanford University Press . pp. 2226 3338. ISBN 978-0-8047-9717-7 . DiSalvo Charles R. 2013. M.K. Gandhi Attorney at Law: The Man Before the Mahatma . University of California Press. p. 153. ISBN 978-0-520-28015-1 . Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 . Reddy E.S. 18 October 2016. Some of Gandhis Early Views on Africans Were Racist. But That Was Before He Became Mahatma . The Wire . Archived from the original on 25 December 2022 . Retrieved 11 January 2023 . Ramsamy Edward; Mbanaso Michael; Korieh Chima 2010. Minorities and the State in Africa . Cambria Press . pp. 7173. ISBN 978-1-62196-874-0 . Guha Ramachandra 2014. Gandhi Before India . Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 978-0-385-53229-7 . Archived from the original on 7 September 2024 . Retrieved 7 September 2024 . a b c Herman 2008 pp. 136137. a b Herman 2008 pp. 154157 280281. Guha Ramachandra 23 December 2018. Setting the Record Straight on Gandhi and Race . The Wire . Archived from the original on 25 December 2022 . Retrieved 25 December 2022 . Vashi Ashish 31 March 2011. For Gandhi Kallenbach was a friend and guide . The Times of India . ISSN 0971-8257 . Archived from the original on 15 April 2021 . Retrieved 20 February 2023 . Bartley Grant 2014. Satuagraha A Medium for Truth . Philosophy Now . No. 101. Archived from the original on 24 March 2014. Corder Catherine; Plaut Martin 2014. Gandhis Decisive South African 1913 Campaign: A Personal Perspective from the Letters of Betty Molteno . South African Historical Journal . 66 1: 2254. doi : 10.108002582473.2013.862565 . S2CID 162635102 . Smith Colleen 1 October 2006. Mbeki: Mahatma Gandhi Satyagraha 100th Anniversary 01102006 . Speeches . Polityorg.za. Archived from the original on 2 May 2013 . Retrieved 20 January 2012 . Prashad Ganesh September 1966. Whiggism in India . Political Science Quarterly . 81 3: 41231. doi : 10.23072147642 . JSTOR 2147642 . Markovits 2002 pp. 367386. Chronology of Mahatma Gandhis Life:India 1918 in WikiSource based on the Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi . Based on public domain volumes. a b Desai Mahadev Haribhai 1930. Preface . Day-to-day with Gandhi: secretarys diary . Translated by Hemantkumar Nilkanth. Sarva Seva Sangh Prakashan. ISBN 978-81-906237-2-8 . Alt URL usurped Gandhi 1965 Collected Works Vol 17. Archived 15 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine Chapter 67. Appeal for enlistment Nadiad 22 June 1918. Gandhi 1965 Collected Works Vol 17. Archived 15 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine Chapter 8. Letter to J. L. Maffey Nadiad 30 April 1918. Bartolf Christian 22 August 2013. Gandhi and War: The Mahatma Gandhi Bart de Ligt Correspondence . Satyagraha Foundation . Archived from the original on 5 February 2024 . Retrieved 5 February 2024 . Andrew T. Jarboe 2021. Indian Soldiers in World War I: Race and Representation in an Imperial War . University of Nebraska. p. 238. ISBN 9781496206787 . Archived from the original on 21 October 2023 . Retrieved 16 October 2023 . Hardiman David April 2001. Champaran and Gandhi: Planters Peasants and Gandhian Politics by Jacques Pouchepadass Review . Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society . 11 1: 99101. doi : 10.1017S1356186301450152 . JSTOR 25188108 . S2CID 154941166 . Satyagraha Laboratories of Mahatma Gandhi . Indian National Congress website . All India Congress Committee . 2004. Archived from the original on 6 December 2006 . Retrieved 25 February 2012 . Gandhi 2008 pp. 196197 . Brown Judith M. 1974. Gandhis Rise to Power: Indian Politics 19151922 . Cambridge University Press . pp. 94102. ISBN 978-0-521-09873-1 . Nojeim M. 2004. Gandhi and King: The Power of Nonviolent Resistance . Bloomsbury Academic. p. 75. ISBN 978-0-275-96574-7 . Archived from the original on 3 February 2024 . Retrieved 3 February 2024 . Keith Robbins 2002. The First World War . Oxford University Press . pp. 133137. ISBN 978-0-19-280318-4 . Green Michael J.; Nicholas Szechenyi 2017. A Global History of the Twentieth Century: Legacies and Lessons from Six National Perspectives . Rowman Littlefield . pp. 8990. ISBN 978-1-4422-7972-8 . a b c Minault 1982 pp. 6872 7882 96102 108109. Minault 1982 pp. 48. a b c Sarah C.M. Paine 2015. Nation Building State Building and Economic Development: Case Studies and Comparisons . Routledge. pp. 2021. ISBN 978-1-317-46409-9 . a b c Ghose 1991 p. 161164. Roderick Matthews 2012. Jinnah vs. Gandhi . Hachette. p. 31. ISBN 978-93-5009-078-7 . Rabindranath Tagore heavily criticized Gandhi at the time in private letters .... They reveal Tagores belief that Gandhi had committed the Indian political nation to a cause that was mistakenly anti-Western and fundamentally negative. Kham Aqeeluzzafar 1990. The All-India Muslim Conference and the Origin of the Khilafat Movement in India . Journal of the Pakistan Historical Society . 38 2: 155162. a b Roberts W.H. 1923. A Review of the Gandhi Movement in India . Political Science Quarterly . 38 2: 22748. doi : 10.23072142634 . JSTOR 2142634 . Bose Sugata Jalal Ayesha 2004. Modern South History Culture Political Economy . Psychology Press. pp. 11214. ISBN 978-0-203-71253-5 . Brown 1991 pp. 140147. Minault 1982 pp. 113116. Akbar S. Ahmed 1997. Jinnah Pakistan and Islamic Identity: The Search for Saladin . Routledge. pp. 5771 . ISBN 978-0-415-14966-2 . Gandhi and Islam . www.islamicity.org . Archived from the original on 7 September 2020 . Retrieved 18 April 2020 . Bandyopadhyaya S. 2004. From Plassey to Partition: A History of Modern India . Orient Blackswan. p. 304. ISBN 978-81-250-2596-2 . Archived from the original on 10 July 2023 . Retrieved 25 August 2023 . He was arrested on 10 March 1922 and was sentenced to prison for six years. ... Gradually the Khilafat movement too died. Brown Judith Margaret 1994. Modern India: the origins of an Asian democracy . Oxford University Press. p. 228. ISBN 978-0-19-873112-2 . Archived from the original on 2 July 2023 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 . Sarkar Sumit 1983. Modern India: 18851947 . Macmillan. p. 233 . ISBN 978-0-333-90425-1 . Markovits 2002 p. 372. Baldwin Lewis V.; Dekar Paul R. 30 August 2013. In an Inescapable Network of Mutuality: Martin Luther King Jr. and the Globalization of an Ethical Ideal . Wipf and Stock Publishers. ISBN 978-1-61097-434-9 . Archived from the original on 5 October 2023 . Retrieved 6 August 2023 . a b c d e Wolpert 2002a pp. 99103. Gandhi Mohandas Karamchand 1940. An Autobiography or The Story of My Experiments With Truth 2nd ed.. Ahmedabad: Navajivan Publishing House. p. 82 . ISBN 0-8070-5909-9 . Also available at Wikisource . Chakrabarty Bidyut 2008. Indian Politics and Society since Independence: events processes and ideology . Routledge. p. 154. ISBN 978-0-415-40868-4 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 4 April 2012 . Gandhi 1990a p. 89. Shashi 1996 p. 9. Gandhi 1990a p. 131. Gandhi Freed on Government Order; Aged Indian Leader is Ill and Must Go to Coast to Convalesce Montreal Gazette 5 February 1924 p. 1 Datta Amaresh 2006. The Encyclopaedia of Indian Literature Volume Two Devraj To Jyoti . Sahitya Akademi. p. 1345. ISBN 978-81-260-1194-0 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 4 April 2012 . a b Gandhi 1990 p. 172. Ghose 1991 p. 199204. Herman 2008 pp. 419420. Bakshi S. R. 1988. Gandhi and Gandhi and the Mass Movement . New Delhi. pp. 13334. Sarma Bina Kumari January 1994. Gandhian Movement and Womens Awakening in Orissa . Indian Historical Review . 21 12: 7879. ISSN 0376-9836 . a b Marilyn French 2008. From Eve to Dawn A History of Women in the World Volume IV: Revolutions and Struggles for Justice in the 20th Century . City University of New York Press. pp. 21920. ISBN 978-1-55861-628-8 . Suruchi Thapar-Bjorkert 2006. Women in the Indian National Movement: Unseen Faces and Unheard Voices 193042 . Sage Publications. pp. 7779. ISBN 978-0-7619-3407-3 . Fischer L. 1950. Gandhi and the Mass Movement . pp. 29899. Hatt Christine 2002. Mahatma Gandhi . Evans Brothers. p. 33. ISBN 978-0-237-52308-4 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 5 January 2022 . Murali Atlury January 1985. Non-Cooperation in Andhra in 192022: Nationalist Intelligentsia and the Mobilization of Peasantry . Indian Historical Review . 12 12: 188217. ISSN 0376-9836 . a b c Dalton 2012 pp. 814 2023 3035. Dhiman 2016 pp. 4649. John M Levine; Michael A. Hogg 2010. Encyclopedia of Group Processes and Intergroup Relations . Sage Publications. p. 73. ISBN 978-1-4129-4208-9 . Herman 2008 pp. 375377 . Herman 2008 p. 359. a b Herman 2008 pp. 378381. a b Muldoon 2016 pp. 9299. Gandhi 2008 pp. 332333. Muldoon 2016 p. 97. Brown 1991 pp. 252257 . Mahatma Gandhi Philosopher Teacher Blue Plaques . English Heritage . Archived from the original on 28 September 2020 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 . Gandhi visits the poor people of England in 1931 Gandhi Video Footage . YouTube . Archived from the original on 2 October 2012 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 . Herman 2008 pp. 382390. Nicholas B. Dirks 2011. Castes of Mind: Colonialism and the Making of Modern India . Princeton University Press . pp. 26774. ISBN 978-1-4008-4094-6 . Archived from the original on 21 July 2023 . Retrieved 4 June 2017 . Kamath M. V. 1995. Gandhis Coolie: Life Times of Ramkrishna Bajaj . Allied Publishers. p. 24. ISBN 81-7023-487-5 . Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 3 June 2020 . McDermott et al. 2014 pp. 369370. Gandhi 1990 p. 246. Ghose Sankar 1992. Jawaharlal Nehru A Biography . Allied Publishers. p. 137. ISBN 8170233690 . Archived from the original on 27 May 2023 . Retrieved 27 May 2023 . Dash Siddhartha January 2005. Gandhi and Subhas Chandra Bose PDF . Orissa Review . Archived from the original PDF on 24 December 2012 . Retrieved 12 April 2012 . Gandhi 1990 pp. 277281. Sarkar Jayabrata 18 April 2006. Power Hegemony and Politics: Leadership Struggle in Congress in the 1930s . Modern Asian Studies . 40 2: 33370. doi : 10.1017S0026749X0600179X . S2CID 145725909 . a b Herman 2008 pp. 467470. Marques J. 2020. The Routledge Companion to Inclusive Leadership . Routledge Companions in Business Management and Marketing. Taylor Francis. p. 403. ISBN 978-1-000-03965-8 . Archived from the original on 7 March 2023 . Retrieved 8 December 2022 . a b Anderson D.; Killingray D. 1992. Policing and Decolonisation: Politics Nationalism and the Police 1917-65 . Studies in imperialism. Manchester University Press. p. 51. ISBN 978-0-7190-3033-8 . Archived from the original on 7 March 2023 . Retrieved 8 December 2022 . Britains hold over India weakened and an early resumption of Congress rule appeared inevitable Bipan Chandra 2000. Indias Struggle for Independence . Penguin Books . p. 543. ISBN 978-81-8475-183-3 . a b c Wolpert 2002a pp. 7475. Gandhi 1990 p. 309. Gurcharan Das 1990. A Fine Family . Penguin Books . pp. 4950. ISBN 978-0-14-012258-9 . a b c Wolpert 2002a pp. 205211. Brock Peter 1983. The Mahatma and mother India: essays on Gandhis nonviolence and nationalism . Navajivan Publishing House . p. 34. Limaye Madhu 1990. Mahatma Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru: a historic partnership . B.R. Publishing Corporation. p. 11. ISBN 81-7018-547-5 . Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 . von Pochhammer Wilhelm 2005. Indias Road to Nationhood: A Political History of the Subcontinent . Allied Publishers. p. 469. ISBN 81-7764-715-6 . Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 . Lapping Brian 1989. End of empire . Paladin. ISBN 978-0-586-08870-8 . a b Khan Yasmin 2007. The Great Partition: The Making of India and Pakistan . Yale University Press. p. 18 . ISBN 978-0-300-12078-3 . Retrieved 1 September 2013 . Quote: the Muslim League had only caught on among South Asian Muslims during the Second World War. ... By the late 1940s the League and the Congress had impressed in the British their own visions of a free future for Indian people. ... one articulated by the Congress rested on the idea of a united plural India as a home for all Indians and the other spelt out by the League rested on the foundation of Muslim nationalism and the carving out of a separate Muslim homeland. p. 18 Gandhi Jinnah Meet First Time Since 44; Disagree on Pakistan but Will Push Peace . The New York Times . 7 May 1947. Archived from the original on 30 April 2013 . Retrieved 25 March 2012 . Bhattacharya Sanjoy 2001. Propaganda and information in Eastern India 193945: a necessary weapon of war . Psychology Press. p. 33. ISBN 978-0-7007-1406-3 . Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 . Shashi 1996 p. 13. Gandhi 2002 pp. 106108. Khan Yasmin 2007. The Great Partition: The Making of India and Pakistan . Yale University Press. p. 1 . ISBN 978-0-300-12078-3 . Retrieved 1 September 2013 . Quote: South Asians learned that the British Indian Empire would be partitioned on 3 June 1947. They heard about it on the radio from relations and friends by reading newspapers and later through government pamphlets. Among a population of almost four hundred million where the vast majority lived in the countryside ... it is hardly surprising that many ... did not hear the news for many weeks afterward. For some the butchery and forced relocation of the summer months of 1947 may have been the first they know about the creation of the two new states rising from the fragmentary and terminally weakened British empire in India. p. 1 Hermann Kulke; Dietmar Rothermund 2004. A History of India . Routledge. pp. 31112 context: 30816. ISBN 978-0-415-32920-0 . Archived from the original on 23 December 2023 . Retrieved 6 June 2017 . Penderel Moon 1962. Divide and Quit . University of California Press. pp. 1128. Jack 1994 p. 418. a b Wolpert 2009 pp. 118121. a b Wolpert 2001a . Wolpert 2009 pp. 118127. a b c Dalton 2012a pp. 6466. Wolpert 2002 p. 7. Metcalf Barbara Daly; Metcalf Thomas R. 2006. A concise history of modern India . Cambridge University Press . pp. 22122. ISBN 978-0-521-86362-9 . Archived from the original on 2 July 2023 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 . Lelyveld Joseph 2011. Great Soul: Mahatma Gandhi and His Struggle with India . Random House Digital Inc. pp. 27881 . ISBN 978-0-307-26958-4 . a b c d e Brown 1991 p. 380: Despite and indeed because of his sense of helplessness Delhi was to be the scene of what he called his greatest fast. ... His decision was made suddenly though after considerable thought he gave no hint of it even to Nehru and Patel who were with him shortly before he announced his intention at a prayer-meeting on 12 January 1948. He said he would fast until communal peace was restored real peace rather than the calm of a dead city imposed by police and troops. Patel and the government took the fast partly as condemnation of their decision to withhold a considerable cash sum still outstanding to Pakistan as a result of the allocation of undivided Indias assets because the hostilities that had broken out in Kashmir; ... But even when the government agreed to pay out the cash Gandhi would not break his fast: that he would only do after a large number of important politicians and leaders of communal bodies agreed to a joint plan for restoration of normal life in the city. Talbot Ian 2016. A History of Modern South Asia Politics States Diasporas . New Haven and London: Yale University Press. p. 183. ISBN 978-0-300-19694-8 . LCCN 2015937886 . Disputes over Kashmir and the division of assets and water in the aftermath of Partition increased Pakistans anxieties regarding its much larger neighbor. Kashmirs significance for Pakistan far exceeded its strategic value; its illegal accession to India challenged the states ideological foundations and pointed to a lack of sovereign fulfillment. The K in Pakistans name stood for Kashmir. Of less symbolic significance was the division of post-Partition assets. Not until December 1947 was an agreement reached on Pakistans share of the sterling assets held by the undivided Government of India at the time of independence. The bulk of these 550 million rupees was held back by New Delhi because of the Kashmir conflict and paid only following Gandhis intervention and fasting. India delivered Pakistans military equipment even more tardily and less than a sixth of the 160 000 tons of ordnance allotted to Pakistan by the Joint Defence Council was actually delivered. Elkins Caroline 2022. Violence: A History of the British Empire . New York NY: Alfred A. Knopf. ISBN 9780307272423 . LCCN 2021018550 . A few months later with war-fueled tensions over Kashmir mounting and India refusing to pay Pakistan 550 million rupees Pakistans share of Britains outstanding war debt Gandhi began to fast. This time my fast is not only against Hindus and Muslims the Mahatma said but also against the Judases who put on false appearances and betray themselves myself and society. The elderly and frail man who was Indias symbolic political and spiritual leader went three days without food before Indias cabinet agreed to pay Pakistan something Nehru had long promised Jinnah he would do. Blinkenberg Lars 2022. India-Pakistan: The History of Unsolved Conflicts: Volume I . Lindhardt og Ringhof. ISBN 9788726894707 . Sardar Patel decided in the middle of December 1947 that the recent financial agreements with Pakistan should not be followed unless Pakistan ceased to support the raiders. ... Gandhi was not convinced and he feltlike Mountbatten and Nehruthat the agreed transfer to Pakistan of a cash amount of Rs. 550 million should be implemented despite the Kashmir crisis. Gandhi started a fast unto death which was officially done to stop communal trouble especially in Delhi but word went round that it was directed against Sardar Patels decision to withhold the cash balances ... Only because of Gandhis interference which was soon to cause his death Sardar Patel gave in and the money was handed over to Pakistan. Sarkar Sumit 2014. Modern India: 18851947 . Delhi and Chennai: Pearson Education. p. 375. ISBN 9789332535749 . This last fast seems to have been directed in part also against Patels increasingly communal attitudes the Home Minister had started thinking in terms of a total transfer of population in the Punjab and was refusing to honour a prior agreement by which India was obliged to give 55 crores of pre-Partition Government of India financial assets to Pakistan. You are not the Sardar I once knew Gandhi is said to have remarked during the fast. Gandhi Gopalkrishna; Suhrud Tridip 2022. Scorching Love: Letters from Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi to his son Devadas . Oxford UK: Oxford University Press. The national capital and its surrounding areas are gripped by massacres and the spewing of hate. The two Punjabs on either side of the border are aflame. On 1 January 1948 a Thai visitor comes and compliments him on Indias independence. Today ... Indian fears his brother Indian. Is this independence? Gandhi asks in response. Gandhi smarts at the Government of Indias new cabinet headed by Jawaharlal Nehru deciding to withhold the transfer of Pakistans share Rs 55 crores of the sterling balance that undivided India has held at independence. The attack on Kashmur is cited as a reason for this. Patel says India cannot give money to Pakistan for making bullets to be shot at us. Gandhis intense agitation settles into an inner quiet on 12 January when the clear thought comes to him that he must fast. And indefinitely. It will end when and if I am satisfied that there is a reunion of hearts of all communities... Singh Gurharpal; Shani Georgio 2022. Sikh Nationalism: From a Dominant Minority to an Ethno-Religious Diaspora . Cambridge University Press. p. 107. ISBN 978-1-107-13654-0 . LCCN 2021017207 . For further evidence of Patels involvement in the clearing of Muslims in north India see Pandey 2001 196. Against the background of the India-Pakistan conflict in Kashmir the dispute between the two countries over the division of cash balances and Gandhis fast in early 1948 Mountbatten noted the following of his interview with Patel: He expressed the view that the only way to re-establish decent relationship between the Muslims and non-Muslim communities was to remove Hindus and Sikhs from Pakistan and drive out the Muslims of the East Punjab and the affected neighbouring areas. MB1D761. Mountbatten Papers University of Southampton. Stein Burton ; Arnold David 2010. A History of India . Blackwell History of the World Series 2nd ed.. Wiley-Blackwell. pp. 352353. ISBN 978-1-4051-9509-6 . He undertook a fast not only to restrain those bent on communal reprisal but also to influence the powerful Home Minister Sardar Patel who was refusing to share out the assets of the former imperial treasury with Pakistan as had been agreed. Gandhis insistence on justice for Pakistan now that the partition was a fact ... had prompted Godses fanatical action. Ahmed Raja Qaiser 2022. Pakistan Factor and the Competing Perspectives in India: Party Centric View . Palgrave Macmillan. p. 11. ISBN 978-981-16-7051-0 . a b Cush Denise; Robinson Catherine; York Michael 2008. Encyclopedia of Hinduism . Taylor Francis. p. 544. ISBN 978-0-7007-1267-0 . Archived from the original on 12 October 2013 . Retrieved 31 August 2013 . Mahatma Gandhi 2000. The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi . Publications Division Ministry of Information and Broadcasting Government of India. p. 130. ISBN 978-81-230-0154-8 . Gandhi Tushar A. 2007. Lets Kill Gandhi ! : A Chronicle of His Last Days the Conspiracy Murder Investigation and Trial . Rupa Company . p. 12. ISBN 978-81-291-1094-7 . Archived from the original on 1 January 2016. Nicholas Henry Pronko 2013. Empirical Foundations of Psychology . Routledge. pp. 34243. ISBN 978-1-136-32701-8 . a b Spear Percival 1990 1978 History of India Volume 2: From the sixteenth century to the twentieth century Penguin p. 239 ISBN 978-0-140-13836-8 a b McDermott et al. 2014 p. 344. a b Wolpert 2004 p. 358. Ghose 1991 p. 367 . Jai Janak Raj July 2002. Commissions and Omissions by Indian Prime Ministers . Regency Publications. pp. 4547. ISBN 978-81-86030-25-7 . Babb Lawrence A. 2020. Religion in India: Past and Present . Edinburgh: Dunedin Academic Press. ISBN 9781780466231 . Sarkar Sumit 2014. Modern India: 18851947 . Delhi and Chennai: Pearson Education. p. 375. ISBN 9789332535749 . Three days later the Mahatma was dead murdered by a Hindu fanatic Nathuram Godse as a climax to a conspiracy hatched by a Poona Brahman group originally inspired by V.D. Savarkara conspiracy which despite ample warnings the police of Bombay and Delhi had done nothing to foil. Hardiman 2003a pp. 174176. Bell J. Bowyer 2017 2005. Assassin: Theory and Practice of Political Violence . London: Routledge. ISBN 978-1-4128-0509-4 . Geva Rotem 2022. Delhi Reborn: Partition and Nation Building in Indias Capital . Stanford University Press. pp. 130131. ISBN 9781503631199 . LCCN 2021051794 . a b Talbot Ian; Singh Gurharpal 2009 The Partition of India Cambridge University Press pp. 118119 ISBN 978-0-521-85661-4 archived from the original on 28 March 2024 retrieved 2 December 2021 It is now almost a cliche that the Partition transformed Delhi from a Mughal to a Punjabi city. The bitter experiences of the refugees encouraged them to support right-wing Hindu parties. ... Trouble began in September 1947 after the arrival from refugees from Pakistan who were determined on revenge and driving Muslims out of properties which they could then occupy. Gandhi in his prayer meetings in Birla House denounced the crooked and ungentlemanly squeezing out of Muslims. Despite these exhortations two-thirds of the citys Muslims were to eventually abandon Indias capital. Khosla 1965 p. 15. Jagdish Chandra Jain 1987. Gandhi the Forgotten Mahatma . Mittal Publications. pp. 7677. ISBN 978-81-7099-037-6 . Jay Robert Nash 1981. Almanac of World Crime . New York: Rowman Littlefield. p. 69. ISBN 978-1-4617-4768-0 . Khosla 1965 p. 38. Khosla 1965 p. 1529. Yakub Memon first to be hanged in Maharashtra after Ajmal Kasab . 30 July 2015. Archived from the original on 28 September 2015 . Retrieved 30 July 2015 . Menon Vinod Kumar 30 January 2014. Revealed: The secret room where Godse was kept after killing Gandh . Mid-Day. Archived from the original on 3 July 2014 . Retrieved 18 June 2014 . a b Mahatma Gandhi 1994. The Gandhi Reader: A Sourcebook of His Life and Writings . Grove Press. pp. 48389 . ISBN 978-0-8021-3161-4 . Over a million get last darshan . The Indian Express . 1 February 1948. p. 1 bottom left. Archived from the original on 4 December 2020 . Retrieved 19 January 2012 . Of all faiths and races together they shed their silent tears . The Indian Express . 31 January 1948. p. 5 top centre. Archived from the original on 25 February 2021 . Retrieved 19 January 2012 . Michaels James 31 January 1948. Cremation of Gandhis body . United Press International . Archived from the original on 4 October 2022 . Retrieved 20 February 2023 . Life . 15 March 1948. p. 76. ISSN 0024-3019 . Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 . a b Ramesh Randeep 16 January 2008. Gandhis ashes to rest at sea not in a museum . The Guardian . London. Archived from the original on 1 September 2013 . Retrieved 14 January 2012 . Kumar Shanti 2006. Gandhi meets primetime: globalization and nationalism in Indian television . University of Illinois Press. p. 170. ISBN 978-0-252-07244-4 . Desai Ian 2011 Towheed Shafquat; Owens W.R. eds. Books Behind Bars: Mahatma Gandhis Community of Captive Readers The History of Reading Volume 1: International Perspectives c.15001990 London: Palgrave Macmillan UK pp. 178191 doi : 10.1057978023031678212 ISBN 978-0-230-31678-2 archived from the original on 29 March 2024 retrieved 29 June 2021 Bakshi S. R. 1982. Gandhi and Bhagat Singh . Proceedings of the Indian History Congress . 43 : 679686. ISSN 2249-1937 . JSTOR 44141310 . Ferrell David 27 September 2001. A Little Serenity in a City of Madness Abstract . Los Angeles Times . p. B 2. ProQuest 421687420 . Archived from the original on 5 October 2013 . Retrieved 14 January 2012 . The Mahatma Life Chronology . Gandhi Ashram . Archived from the original on 23 December 2023 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 . Margot Bigg 2012. Delhi . Avalon. p. 14 . ISBN 978-1-61238-490-0 . Misra R.P. 2007. Rediscovering Gandhi . Gandhian studies and peace research series in Maltese. Concept Publishing Company in collaboration with Gandhi Smriti Darshan Samiti. p. 102. ISBN 978-81-8069-375-5 . Archived from the original on 6 August 2023 . Retrieved 6 August 2023 . a b Marbaniang Domenic 2023. Gandhian Pluralist Spirituality and the Anticorruption Mission of the Aam Aadmi Party in Delhi . Asian Spiritualities and Social Transformation . Springer Nature. pp. 247261. doi : 10.1007978-981-99-2641-114 . ISBN 978-981-99-2641-1 . Archived from the original on 10 August 2024 . Retrieved 10 August 2024 . Borman 1986 pp. 192 195 208229. Dalton 2012 pp. 3035. Yet he Gandhi must bear some of the responsibility for losing his followers along the way. The sheer vagueness and contradictions recurrent throughout his writing made it easier to accept him as a saint than to fathom the challenge posed by his demanding beliefs. Gandhi saw no harm in self-contradictions: life was a series of experiments and any principle might change if Truth so dictated. Sharp Gene 1960. Gandhi Wields the Weapon of Moral Power: Three Case Histories . Navajivan. p. 4 . Dalton 2012 pp. 3032. Borman 1986 pp. 26 34. Indira Carr 2012. Stuart Brown; et al. eds.. Biographical Dictionary of Twentieth-Century Philosophers . Routledge. p. 264. ISBN 978-1-134-92796-8 . Watson I. Bruce 1977. Satyagraha: The Gandhian Synthesis . Journal of Indian History . 55 12: 32535. a b Richards Glyn 1986. Gandhis Concept of Truth and the Advaita Tradition . Religious Studies . 22 1: 114. doi : 10.1017S0034412500017996 . ISSN 0034-4125 . JSTOR 20006253 . S2CID 170379545 . Parel Anthony 2006. Gandhis Philosophy and the Quest for Harmony . Cambridge University Press . p. 195. ISBN 978-0-521-86715-3 . Archived from the original on 21 July 2023 . Retrieved 13 January 2012 . Nicholas F. Gier 2004. The Virtue of Nonviolence: From Gautama to Gandhi . State University of New York Press . pp. 4042. ISBN 978-0-7914-5949-2 . Archived from the original on 21 July 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2017 . Pletcher Kenneth. Salt March Definition Causes History Facts . Britannica . Archived from the original on 21 November 2019 . Retrieved 20 February 2023 . Sita Anantha Raman 2009. Women in India: A Social and Cultural History . ABC-CLIO. pp. 164166. ISBN 978-0-313-01440-6 . Herman 2008 p. 176 . Gandhi M.K. Some Rules of Satyagraha Young India Navajivan 23 February 1930 . The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi . Vol. 48. p. 340. Misra Bijoy 18 October 2017. Mahatma Gandhis Rules for Satyagraha . www.lokvani.com . Archived from the original on 30 July 2023 . Retrieved 5 July 2024 . Young India 27 February 1930 The Gujarati original of this appeared in Navajivan 23 February 1930 Yadav Yogendra 9 January 2013. Some Rules of Satyagraha . The Gandhi-King Community . Archived from the original on 11 August 2024 . Retrieved 5 July 2024 . Prabhu R.K.; Rao U.R. eds. 1967. Power of Satyagraha . The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi . Ahemadabad: Navajivan Mudranalaya. ISBN 81-7229-149-3 . Archived from the original on 2 September 2007. Gandhi M.K. 1982 Young India 16 June 1920. 156. The Law of Suffering PDF . Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi . Vol. 20 electronic ed.. New Delhi: Publications Division Ministry of Information and Broadcasting Govt. of India. pp. 39699. Archived PDF from the original on 28 January 2012 . Retrieved 14 January 2012 . Sharma Jai Narain 2008. Satyagraha: Gandhis approach to conflict resolution . Concept Publishing Company. p. 17. ISBN 978-81-8069-480-6 . Archived from the original on 21 July 2023 . Retrieved 26 January 2012 . R. Taras 2002. Liberal and Illiberal Nationalisms . Palgrave Macmillan. p. 91. ISBN 978-0-230-59640-5 . Quote: In 1920 Jinnah opposed satyagraha and resigned from the Congress boosting the fortunes of the Muslim League. Yasmin Khan 2007. The Great Partition: The Making of India and Pakistan . Yale University Press. pp. 1122 . ISBN 978-0-300-12078-3 . Rafiq Zakaria 2002. The Man who Divided India . Popular Prakashan. pp. 8385. ISBN 978-81-7991-145-7 . Herman 2008 p. 586. Chairez-Garza Jesus Francisco 2 January 2014. Touching space: Ambedkar on the spatial features of untouchability . Contemporary South Asia . 22 1. Taylor Francis: 3750. doi : 10.108009584935.2013.870978 . S2CID 145020542 . Ambedkar B. R. 1945 What Congress and Gandhi have done to the Untouchables Thacker Co. Editions First Edition pp. v 282297. Herman 2008 pp. 359 378380. Asirvatham Eddy 1995. Political Theory . S.chand. ISBN 81-219-0346-7 . Parel Anthony J. 2016. Pax Gandhiana: The Political Philosophy of Mahatma Gandhi . Oxford University Press. pp. 202. ISBN 978-0-19-049146-8 . Archived from the original on 21 July 2023 . Retrieved 21 July 2019 . Gandhi staked his reputation as an original political thinker on this specific issue. Hitherto violence had been used in the name of political rights such as in street riots regicide or armed revolutions. Gandhi believes there is a better way of securing political rights that of nonviolence and that this new way marks an advance in political ethics. Christopher Chapple 1993. Nonviolence to Animals Earth and Self in Asian Traditions . State University of New York Press . pp. 1618 5457. ISBN 978-0-7914-1497-2 . Gandhi Mohandis K. 11 August 1920. The Doctrine of the Sword . Young India . M. K. Gandhi: 3. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017 . Retrieved 3 May 2017 . Cited from Borman 1986 pp. 253 . Devji Faisal 2012. The Impossible Indian: Gandhi and the Temptation of Violence . Harvard University Press. ISBN missing Johnson 2006 p. xi . a b Stein Burton 2010. A History of India . John Wiley Sons. pp. 289. ISBN 978-1-4443-2351-1 . Archived from the original on 21 July 2023 . Retrieved 21 July 2019 . Gandhi was the leading genius of the later and ultimately successful campaign for Indias independence. Gupta Sourabh 2 October 2013. Gandhi Jayanti: Why non-violent Mahatma Gandhi preferred violence to cowardice . India Today . Archived from the original on 6 August 2023 . Retrieved 6 August 2023 . a b Jahanbegloo R. 2020. Mahatma Gandhi: A Nonviolent Perspective on Peace . Peacemakers. Taylor Francis. p. 69. ISBN 978-1-000-22313-2 . Archived from the original on 6 August 2023 . Retrieved 6 August 2023 . M.K. Gandhi as a Author M.K. Gandhi: Author Journalist Printer-Publisher Journalist Gandhi . www.mkgandhi.org . Archived from the original on 25 January 2022 . Retrieved 25 January 2022 . Would Gandhi have been a Wikipedian? . The Indian Express . 17 January 2012. Archived from the original on 9 December 2012 . Retrieved 26 January 2012 . Peerless Communicator Archived 4 August 2007 at the Wayback Machine by V. N. Narayanan. Life Positive Plus OctoberDecember 2002. Roberts Andrew 26 March 2011. Among the Hagiographers A book review of Great Soul: Mahatma Gandhi and His Struggle With India by Joseph Lelyveld . The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on 3 January 2012 . Retrieved 14 January 2012 . Gandhi M.K. Unto this Last: A paraphrase . Ahmedabad: Navajivan Publishing House. ISBN 81-7229-076-4 . Archived from the original on 30 October 2012 . Retrieved 21 July 2012 . cite book : CS1 maint: unfit URL link Pareku Bhikhu 2001. Gandhi . Oxford University Press . p. 159. ISBN 978-0-19-160667-0 . Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 . M.K. Gandhi 1934. Songs From Prison . Public Resource. Revised edition of Bapus works to be withdrawn . The Times of India . 16 November 2005. Archived from the original on 29 October 2012 . Retrieved 25 March 2012 . Peter Ruhe. Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi CWMG Controversy . Gandhiserve.org. Archived from the original on 7 September 2016 . Retrieved 12 July 2016 . Vilanilam J.V. 2005. Mass Communication In India: A Sociological Perspective . SAGE Publications. p. 68. ISBN 978-93-5280-570-9 . Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 . The greatest of all national leaders and journalists of the independence movement was Mahatma Gandhi. Parker Geoffrey 1995. The Times Illustrated History of the World . HarperCollins. p. 290. ISBN 978-0-06-270010-0 . Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 . The hero of Indian independence from the British and the greatest figure in decolonization was Mahatma Gandhi Douglas R. 2021. The World War 19391945: The Cartoonists Vision . Routledge Library Editions: WW2. Routledge. p. 192. ISBN 978-1-000-46048-3 . Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 . Mahatma Gandhi was the most influential of all the Indian politicians in the campaign for independence Prashad G.; Nawani A. 2006. Writings on Nehru: Some Reflections on Indian Thoughts and Related Essays . Northern Book Centre. p. 92. ISBN 978-81-7211-204-2 . Archived from the original on 20 February 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 . Mahatma Gandhi was the greatest absorbant sic and the greatest personality of modern India Blamberger G.; Kakar S. 2018. Imaginations of Death and the Beyond in India and Europe . Springer Nature Singapore. p. 3. ISBN 978-981-10-6707-5 . Archived from the original on 20 February 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 . Mahatma Gandhi modern Indias greatest icon elevated his search for moksha above any of his social or political goals including Indias freedom from colonial rule. Carson C. 2001. The Autobiography of Martin Luther King Jr . Grand Central Publishing. p. 108. ISBN 978-0-7595-2037-0 . Archived from the original on 20 February 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 . Gandhi is not only the greatest figure in Indias history but his influence is felt in almost every aspect of life and public policy. Wolpert 2001 pp. 32263. Indira woman of millennium Mahatma Asian of century . Tribune India . 2 December 1999. Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 . Mahatma Gandhi greatest man . BBC News . 1 January 2000. Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 . a b Mahatma Gandhi Biography . Social Justice Special Assistance Government of Maharashtra . Archived from the original on 14 March 2022 . Retrieved 21 December 2021 . McGregor Ronald Stuart 1993. The Oxford Hindi-English Dictionary . Oxford University Press. p. 799 . ISBN 978-0-19-864339-5 . Retrieved 31 August 2013 . Quote: maha- S. great mighty large ... eminent atma S. 1. soul spirit; the self the individual; the mind the heart; 2. the ultimate being. : high-souled of noble nature; a noble or venerable man. Gandhi 2008 p. 172 . ...Kasturba would accompany Gandhi on his departure from Cape Town for England in July 1914 en route to India. ... In different South African towns Pretoria Cape Town Bloemfontein Johannesburg and the Natal cities of Durban and Verulam the struggles martyrs were honoured and the Gandhis bade farewell. Addresses in Durban and Verulam referred to Gandhi as a Mahatma great soul. He was seen as a great soul because he had taken up the poors cause. The whites too said good things about Gandhi who predicted a future for the Empire if it respected justice. Charan Shandilya. India-China Relations . Pt. Sunderlal Institute of Asian Studies. p. 187. Mahatma Gandhi: A Chronology . Ministry of Information and Broadcasting India . 1971. p. 60. Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 . Tagore Rabindranath 1998. Dutta Krishna ed.. Rabindranath Tagore: an anthology . Robinson Andrew. Macmillan. p. 2. ISBN 978-0-312-20079-4 . Guha 2013a pp. 362 662. During my last trip to Europe I saw a great deal of Mr Gandhi. From year to year I have known him intimately for over twenty years I have found him getting more and more selfless. He is now leading almost an ascetic sort of life not the life of an ordinary ascetic that we usually see but that of a great Mahatma and the one idea that engrosses his mind is his motherland. Pranjivan Mehta to G. K. Gokhale dated Rangoon 8 November 1909 File No. 4 Servants of India Society Papers NMML. Gandhi 1990a p. viii. Basu Majumdar A. K. 1993 Rabindranath Tagore: The Poet of India Indus Publishing ISBN 81-85182-92-2 p. 83: When Gandhi returned to India Rabindranaths eldest brother Dwijendranath was perhaps the first to address him as Mahatma. Rabindranath followed suit and then the whole of India called him Mahatma Gandhi. Ghose 1991 p. 158 . So Tagore differed from many of Gandhis ideas but yet he had great regard for him and Tagore was perhaps the first important Indian who called Gandhi a Mahatma. But in 1921 when Gandhi was asked whether he was really a Mahatma Gandhi replied that he did not feel like one and that in any event he could not define a Mahatma for he had never met any. Champion of Liberty Issue . Smithsonian National Postal Museum. Archived from the original on 27 December 2023 . Retrieved 25 December 2023 . Guha Ramachandra 2007. India After Gandhi: The History of the Worlds Largest Democracy . Delhi: Ecco Press. ISBN 978-0-06-019881-7 . Stamps on Mahatma Gandhi in 150 countries . India Today . Press Trust of India. 2 October 2008. Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 . Palestine Turkey and Uzbekistan Issue Commemorative Gandhi Stamps . The Wire . 2 October 2019. Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 . Memorial stamp marking Mahatma Gandhi unveiled in Iran . Islamic Republic News Agency . 2 October 2019. Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 5 June 2023 . Yojana October 2020 English Special Edition: A Development Monthly . Public Division. p. 70. Chaudhury Dipanjan Roy 2 October 2019. Russia marks 150th year of Mahatma Gandhi with series of events . The Economic Times . Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 March 2023 . Moore Tony 16 November 2014. Indian PM Narendra Modi unveils Gandhi statue . Brisbane Times . Archived from the original on 22 November 2018 . Retrieved 7 April 2024 . Mohandas Karamchand Mahatma Gandhi . Monument Australia . Archived from the original on 7 April 2024 . Retrieved 7 April 2024 . The Minor Planet Circular 125471 PDF . Minor Planet Center. 24 September 2020. p. 939. Archived PDF from the original on 1 October 2023 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 . Statue of Mahatma Gandhi erected in Astana . jjtv.kz . 14 October 2022. Archived from the original on 8 November 2022 . Retrieved 8 November 2022 . Mahatma Gandhis bust at UN a reminder of values he upheld: UN Chief . Business Standard News . 15 December 2022. Archived from the original on 26 December 2022 . Retrieved 11 January 2023 . Kings Trip to India . Mlk-kpp01.stanford.edu. Archived from the original on 21 March 2009 . Retrieved 24 January 2012 . Sidner Sara 17 February 2009. King moved as father was on trip to Gandhis memorial . CNN . Archived from the original on 14 April 2012 . Retrieved 24 January 2012 . DSouza Placido P. 20 January 2003. Commemorating Martin Luther King Jr.: Gandhis influence on King . San Francisco Chronicle . Archived from the original on 18 January 2013 . Retrieved 24 January 2012 . Tougas Shelley 2011. Birmingham 1963: How a Photograph Rallied Civil Rights Support . Capstone Press. p. 12. ISBN 978-0-7565-4398-3 . Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 24 January 2012 . Cone James 1992. Martin Malcolm America: A Dream Or a Nightmare . Orbis Books. ISBN 0-88344-824-6 . a b Mandela Nelson 31 December 1999. The Sacred Warrior . Time . ISSN 0040-781X . Archived from the original on 7 March 2023 . Retrieved 20 February 2023 . Commemorative Soiree: Relevance of Vaclav Havel Today . Embassy of the Czech Republic in Delhi. Archived from the original on 4 February 2022 . Retrieved 4 February 2022 . Sethi Rubina 22 February 2004. An alternative Gandhi . The Tribune . India. Archived from the original on 14 May 2009 . Retrieved 12 March 2009 . Bhana Surendra; Vahed Goolam H. 2005. The Making of a Political Reformer: Gandhi in South Africa 18931914 . Manohar. pp. 4445 149. ISBN 978-81-7304-612-4 . Einstein on Gandhi Einsteins letter to Gandhi Courtesy:Saraswati Albano-Muller Notes by Einstein on Gandhi Source: The Hebrew University of Jerusalem . Gandhiserve.org. 18 October 1931. Archived from the original on 17 January 2012 . Retrieved 24 January 2012 . Uwechue Raph 1981. Makers of Modern Africa: Profiles in History . Published by Africa Journal Ltd. for Africa Books Ltd. ISBN 978-0-903274-14-2 . Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 5 September 2021 . Dhupelia-Mesthrie Uma 2005. Gandhis prisoner?: the life of Gandhis son Manilal . Permanent Black. p. 293. ISBN 978-81-7824-116-6 . Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 26 January 2012 . In the company of Bapu . The Telegraph . 3 October 2004. Archived from the original on 8 February 2012 . Retrieved 26 January 2012 . Gilmore Mikal 5 December 2005. Lennon Lives Forever . Rolling Stone . Archived from the original on 28 May 2007 . Retrieved 24 January 2012 . Applebome Peter 30 March 2008. Applying Gandhis Ideas to Climate Change . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 2 December 2021 . Retrieved 2 December 2021 . Al Gore cited both Gandhi and Abraham Lincoln in a speech on climate change in 2007. He noted Gandhis sense of satyagraha ... Obama steers clear of politics in school pep talk . MSNBC . Associated Press . 8 September 2009. Archived from the original on 4 October 2013 . Retrieved 24 January 2012 . The Children of Gandhi excerpt . Time . 31 December 1999. Archived from the original on 5 October 2013. Moreno Jenalia 16 January 2010. Houston community celebrates district named for Gandhi . Houston Chronicle . Archived from the original on 11 April 2015 . Retrieved 24 January 2012 . a b Mohan Shaj; Dwivedi Divya; Nancy Jean-Luc 2018. Gandhi and Philosophy: On Theological Anti-Politics . Bloomsbury Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4742-2173-3 . Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 . UN declares 2 October Gandhis birthday as International Day of Nonviolence . UN News Centre. 15 June 2007. Archived from the original on 23 January 2012 . Retrieved 2 April 2012 . School Day of Nonviolence And Peace . Letter of Peace addressed to the UN . cartadelapaz.org. 30 January 2009. Archived from the original on 1 November 2011 . Retrieved 9 January 2012 . a b Eulogio Diaz del Corral 31 January 1983. DENIP: School Day of Nonviolence and Peace . DENIP in Spanish. Archived from the original on 27 February 2012 . Retrieved 30 January 2012 . Clark Ronald 2011. Einstein: The Life and Times . AC Black. ISBN 978-1-4482-0270-6 . University and Educational Intelligence PDF . Current Science . 6 6: 314. December 1937. Archived PDF from the original on 16 July 2018 . Retrieved 15 July 2018 . Peace Laureates livinghumanity . LivingHumanity. Archived from the original on 21 March 2024 . Retrieved 24 March 2024 . Burger D. 2002. South Africa Yearbook 200203 . Government Communication and Information System. p. 99. ISBN 978-1-919855-14-1 . Archived from the original on 24 March 2024 . Retrieved 24 March 2024 . Top 25 Political Icons . Time . 4 February 2011. Archived from the original on 28 December 2013 . Retrieved 9 February 2011 . Nobel Peace Prize Nominations . American Friends Service Committee. 14 April 2010. Archived from the original on 4 February 2012 . Retrieved 30 January 2012 . a b c d Tnnesson yvind 1 December 1999. Mahatma Gandhi the Missing Laureate . Nobel Foundation . Archived from the original on 5 July 2013 . Retrieved 16 January 2012 . Relevance of Gandhian Philosophy in the 21st Century Archived 15 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Icrs.ugm.ac.id. Retrieved 5 August 2013. Vegetarian Hall of Fame . North American Vegetarian Society . Archived from the original on 13 April 2019 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 . Elkins Zachary; Ginsburg Tom; Melton Melton 2009 The Endurance of National Constitutions Cambridge University Press p. 158 ISBN 978-0-521-51550-4 Whereas Pakistans leaders died early Indias founding triumvirate of Jawaharlal Nehru Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel and Rajendra Prasad provided a stable hand for the early years and a personal continuity with the father of the nation Mahatma Gandhi Gandhi not formally conferred Father of the Nation title: Govt . The Indian Express . 11 July 2012. Archived from the original on 6 September 2014. Constitution doesnt permit Father of the Nation title: Government . The Times of India . 26 October 2012. Archived from the original on 7 January 2017. a b Nehru Jawaharlal. An Autobiography . Bodley Head. Crusade with arms . The Hindu . February 2000. Archived from the original on 13 April 2018. Father of the Nation RTI . NDTV . Archived from the original on 4 December 2016 . Retrieved 21 September 2016 . Constitution does not permit any titles . The Times of India . Archived from the original on 7 January 2017 . Retrieved 21 September 2016 . Mahatma: Life of Gandhi 18691948 1968 5hrs 10min . Channel of GandhiServe Foundation. Archived from the original on 18 January 2015 . Retrieved 30 December 2014 . Vithalbhai Jhaveri . GandhiServe Foundatiom. Archived from the original on 31 December 2014 . Retrieved 30 December 2014 . Dwyer Rachel 2011. The Case of the Missing Mahatma:Gandhi and the Hindi Cinema PDF . Public Culture . 23 2. Duke University Press: 34976. doi : 10.121508992363-1161949 . Archived PDF from the original on 21 March 2017. Fischer Louis 1957. The Life of Mahatma Gandhi . London: Johnathan Cape. Melvani Lavina February 1997. Making of the Mahatma . Hinduism Today . Archived from the original on 3 February 2012 . Retrieved 26 January 2012 . Pandohar Jaspreet Reviewer. Movies Maine Gandhi Ko Nahin Mara I Did Not Kill Gandhi 2005 . BBC British Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on 4 July 2015 . Retrieved 30 December 2014 . Lal Vinay. Moving Images of Gandhi PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 30 December 2014 . Barczewski S.; Farr M. 2019. The MacKenzie Moment and Imperial History: Essays in Honour of John M. MacKenzie . Britain and the World. Springer International Publishing. p. 159. ISBN 978-3-030-24459-0 . Retrieved 8 December 2022 . Kostelanetz Richard ; Flemming Robert 1999. Writings on Glass: Essays Interviews Criticism . University of California Press. p. 102 . ISBN 978-0-520-21491-0 . Philip Glass 2015. Words Without Music: A Memoir . Liveright. pp. 192 307. ISBN 978-1-63149-081-1 . Kostelanetz Flemming 1999 p. 168. Its fashionable to be anti-Gandhi . DNA. 1 October 2005. Archived from the original on 22 June 2013 . Retrieved 25 January 2013 . Dutt Devina 20 February 2009. Drama king . Live Mint . Archived from the original on 30 April 2013 . Retrieved 25 January 2013 . Kunzru Hari 29 March 2011. Appreciating Gandhi Through His Human Side . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 31 January 2012 . Retrieved 26 January 2012 . Review of Great Soul: Mahatma Gandhi and His Struggle With India by Joseph Lelyveld. US author slams Gandhi gay claim . The Australian . Agence France-Presse. 29 March 2011. Archived from the original on 1 May 2013 . Retrieved 26 January 2012 . Kamath Sudhish 28 February 2011. A Welcome Effort . The Hindu . Archived from the original on 2 February 2014 . Retrieved 24 January 2014 . Pandit Unnati 5 March 2019. Bharat Bhagya Vidhata captivates the audience . The Live Nagpur . Archived from the original on 7 May 2019 . Retrieved 7 May 2019 . NEW YORK; Cole Porters Lyrics Depend On the Music But Even Solo Theyre So Easy to Love . The New York Times . 1 November 1987. ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 24 May 2015 . Retrieved 7 May 2023 . Ghosh B. N. 2001. Contemporary issues in development economics . Psychology Press. p. 211. ISBN 978-0-415-25136-5 . Yardley Jim 6 November 2010. Obama Invokes Gandhi Whose Ideal Eludes India . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 17 August 2013 . Retrieved 22 January 2012 . Reserve Bank of India Bank Notes . Rbi.org.in. Archived from the original on 26 October 2011 . Retrieved 5 November 2011 . Chatterjee Sailen. Martyrs Day . Features . Press Information Bureau. Archived from the original on 2 February 2012 . Retrieved 30 January 2012 . a b Kaggere Niranjan 2 October 2010. Here Gandhi is God . BangaloreMirror.com. Archived from the original on 4 October 2013 . Retrieved 29 January 2011 . Mahatma Gandhi Temple . www.mahatmagandhitemple.org . Archived from the original on 14 April 2018 . Retrieved 20 February 2023 . Abram David; Edwards Nick 2003. The Rough Guide to South India . Rough Guides. p. 506. ISBN 978-1-84353-103-6 . Retrieved 21 January 2012 . Gandhi 2007a p. page needed . Dave Hiral 22 June 2016. Lodged in old age home in Delhi Gandhis grandson looks to Rajkot . Hindustan Times . Archived from the original on 26 October 2021 . Retrieved 29 October 2018 . Ians Surat 8 November 2016. Kanu Gandhi Gandhijis grandson and ex-Nasa scientist dies . Hindustan Times . Archived from the original on 19 August 2021 . Retrieved 29 October 2018 . General and cited references Books Ahmed Talat 2018. Mohandas Gandhi: Experiments in Civil Disobedience . ISBN 0-7453-3429-6 . Barr F. Mary 1956. Bapu: Conversations and Correspondence with Mahatma Gandhi 2nd ed.. Bombay: International Book House. OCLC 8372568 . see book article Bondurant Joan Valerie 1971. Conquest of Violence: the Gandhian philosophy of conflict . University of California Press . ISBN missing Borman William 1986. Gandhi and Non-Violence . State University of New York Press . ISBN 978-0-88706-331-2 . Brown Judith Margaret 1991. Gandhi: Prisoner of Hope . Yale University Press . ISBN 978-0-300-05125-4 . Brown Judith M. 2004. Gandhi Mohandas Karamchand Mahatma Gandhi 18691948 Oxford Dictionary of National Biography Oxford University Press. ISBN missing Brown Judith M. and Anthony Parel eds. 2012. The Cambridge Companion to Gandhi ; 14 essays by scholars. ISBN missing Chadha Yogesh 1997. Gandhi: a life . John Wiley. ISBN 978-0-471-24378-6 . Dwivedi Divya; Mohan Shaj; Nancy Jean-Luc 2019. Gandhi and Philosophy: On Theological Anti-politics . Bloomsbury Academic UK. ISBN 978-1-4742-2173-3 . Dalton Dennis 2012. Mahatma Gandhi: Nonviolent Power in Action . Columbia University Press . ISBN 978-0-231-15959-3 . Dalton Dennis 2012a. Mahatma Gandhi: Nonviolent Power in Action . Columbia University Press . ISBN 978-0-231-53039-2 . Dhiman S. 2016. Gandhi and Leadership: New Horizons in Exemplary Leadership . Springer. ISBN 978-1-137-49235-7 . Easwaran Eknath 2011. Gandhi the Man: How One Man Changed Himself to Change the World . Nilgiri Press. ISBN 978-1-58638-055-7 . Hook Sue Vander 2010. Mahatma Gandhi: Proponent of Peace . ABDO. ISBN 978-1-61758-813-6 . Gandhi Rajmohan 1990. Patel A Life . Navajivan Pub. House. Gandhi Rajmohan 2007a. Mohandas: A True Story of a Man His People and an Empire . Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-310411-7 . Gandhi Rajmohan 2007b. Mohandas: True Story of a Man His People and an Empire . Penguin Books . ISBN 978-81-8475-317-2 . Gandhi Rajmohan 2008. Gandhi: The Man His People and the Empire . University of California Press . ISBN 978-0-520-25570-8 . Gangrade K.D. 2004. Role of Shanti Sainiks in the Global Race for Armaments . Moral Lessons From Gandhis Autobiography And Other Essays . Concept Publishing Company. ISBN 978-81-8069-084-6 . Ghose Sankar 1991. Mahatma Gandhi . Allied Publishers. ISBN 978-81-7023-205-6 . Guha Ramachandra 2013. Gandhi Before India . Vintage Books. ISBN 978-0-385-53230-3 . Guha Ramachandra 2013a. Gandhi Before India . Allen Lane. ISBN 978-0-670-08387-9 . Guha Ramachandra 2013x. Gandhi Before India . Penguin Books Limited . ISBN 978-93-5118-322-8 . Guha Ramachandra 15 October 2014a. Gandhi before India . Penguin Books Limited . ISBN 978-93-5118-322-8 . Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 24 October 2021 . verification needed Guha Ramachandra 2015. Gandhi before India . Vintage Books. ISBN 978-0-385-53230-3 . Hardiman David 2003. Gandhi in His Time and Ours: the global legacy of his ideas . C. Hurst Co. ISBN 978-1-85065-711-8 . Hardiman David 2003a. Gandhi in His Time and Ours: The Global Legacy of His Ideas . Columbia University Press . ISBN 978-0-231-13114-8 . Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 . Hatt Christine 2002. Mahatma Gandhi . Evans Brothers. ISBN 978-0-237-52308-4 . Herman Arthur 2008. Gandhi Churchill: The Epic Rivalry that Destroyed an Empire and Forged Our Age . Random House Publishing Group. ISBN 978-0-553-90504-5 . Ebook: ISBN 978-0-553-80463-8 . Jai Janak Raj 1996. Commissions and Omissions by Indian Prime Ministers: 19471980 . Regency Publications. ISBN 978-81-86030-23-3 . Majmudar Uma 2005. Gandhis Pilgrimage of Faith: from darkness to light . SUNY Press. ISBN 978-0-7914-6405-2 . Markovits Claude ed. 2002. A History of Modern India 14801950 . Anthem Press. ISBN 978-1-84331-004-4 . McDermott Rachel Fell; Gordon Leonard A. ; Embree Ainslie T. ; Pritchett Frances W.; Dalton Dennis eds. 2014. Sources of Indian Traditions Volume 2: Modern India Pakistan and Bangladesh 3rd ed.. New York: Columbia University Press. ISBN 978-0-231-13830-7 . Miller Jake C. 2002. Prophets of a just society . Nova Publishers. ISBN 978-1-59033-068-5 . Minault Gail 1982. The Khilafat Movement Religious Symbolism and Political Mobilization in India . Columbia University Press . ISBN 0-231-05072-0 . Muldoon Andrew 2016. Empire Politics and the Creation of the 1935 India Act: Last Act of the Raj . Routledge. ISBN 978-1-317-14431-1 . Pandeya Visva Mohana 2003. Historiography of Indias Partition: an analysis of imperialist writings . Atlantic Publishers Dist. ISBN 978-81-269-0314-6 . Pilisuk Marc ; Nagler Michael N. 2011. Peace Movements Worldwide: Players and practices in resistance to war . ABC-CLIO. ISBN 978-0-313-36482-2 . Ruhe Peter 2004. Gandhi . Phaidon. ISBN 978-0-7148-4459-6 . Schouten Jan Peter 2008. Jesus as Guru: the image of Christ among Hindus and Christians in India . Rodopi. ISBN 978-90-420-2443-4 . Sharp Gene 1979. Gandhi as a Political Strategist: with essays on ethics and politics . P. Sargent Publishers. ISBN 978-0-87558-090-6 . Shashi S. S. 1996. Encyclopaedia Indica: India Pakistan Bangladesh . Anmol Publications. ISBN 978-81-7041-859-7 . Sinha Satya 2015. The Dialectic of God: The Theosophical Views Of Tagore and Gandhi . Partridge Publishing India. ISBN 978-1-4828-4748-2 . Sofri Gianni 1999. Gandhi and India: a century in focus . Windrush Press. ISBN 978-1-900624-12-1 . Thacker Dhirubhai 2006. Gandhi Mohandas Karamchand . In Amaresh Datta ed.. The Encyclopaedia of Indian Literature Volume Two Devraj To Jyoti . Sahitya Akademi. p. 1345. ISBN 978-81-260-1194-0 . Todd Anne M. 2004. Mohandas Gandhi . Infobase Publishing. ISBN 978-0-7910-7864-8 . ; short biography for children Todd Anne M. 2009. Mohandas Gandhi . Infobase Publishing. ISBN 978-1-4381-0662-5 . Wolpert Stanley 2001. Gandhis Passion: The Life and Legacy of Mahatma Gandhi . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-515634-8 . Archived from the original on 21 July 2023 . Retrieved 3 June 2017 . Wolpert Stanley 2001a. Midnight in Calcutta . Gandhis Passion: The life and legacy of Mahatma Gandhi . Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-515634-X . Archived from the original on 21 March 2016 . Retrieved 20 February 2023 . Wolpert Stanley 2002. Gandhis Passion: the life and legacy of Mahatma Gandhi . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-972872-5 . Wolpert Stanley 2002a. Gandhis Passion: The Life and Legacy of Mahatma Gandhi . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-515634-8 . Archived from the original on 19 February 2017. Wolpert Stanley 2004. A New History of India 7th ed.. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0195166787 . Wolpert Stanley 2009. Shameful Flight: The Last Years of the British Empire in India . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978-0-19-539394-1 . Archived from the original on 1 October 2013. Scholarly articles Danielson Leilah C. In My Extremity I Turned to Gandhi: American Pacifists Christianity and Gandhian Nonviolence 19151941 . Church History 72.2 2003: 361388. Du Toit Brian M. The Mahatma Gandhi and South Africa. Journal of Modern African Studies 344 1996: 643660. JSTOR 161593 . Gokhale B. G. Gandhi and the British Empire History Today Nov 1969 1911 pp 744751 online. Juergensmeyer Mark. The Gandhi Revival A Review Article. The Journal of Asian Studies 432 Feb. 1984 pp. 293298. JSTOR 2055315 Khosla G.D. 1965. The Murder of the Mahatma proceedings by the Chief Justice of Punjab PDF . Jaico Publishers. Archived from the original PDF on 21 September 2015. Kishwar Madhu. Gandhi on Women. Economic and Political Weekly 20 no. 41 1985: 1753758. JSTOR 4374920 . Mohammed Fevin Gandhi the Great . 2013 PhD in Historical Research Coordinated under Prof. Ram Prasad Sharma. Murthy C. S. H. N. Oinam Bedajit Meitei and Dapkupar Tariang. The Tale Of Gandhi Through The Lens: An Inter-Textual Analytical Study Of Three Major Films-Gandhi The Making Of The Mahatma And Gandhi My Father. CINEJ Cinema Journal 2.2 2013: 437. online Power Paul F. Toward a Revaluation of Gandhis Political Thought. Western Political Quarterly 16.1 1963: 99108 excerpt. Rudolph Lloyd I. Gandhi in the Mind of America. Economic and Political Weekly 45 no. 47 2010: 2326. JSTOR 25764146 . Primary sources Abel M 2005. Glimpses of Indian National Movement . ICFAI Books. ISBN 978-81-7881-420-9 . Andrews C. F. 2008 1930. VII The Teaching of Ahimsa . Mahatma Gandhis Ideas Including Selections from His Writings . Pierides Press. ISBN 978-1-4437-3309-0 . Dalton Dennis ed. 1996. Mahatma Gandhi: Selected Political Writings . Hackett Publishing. ISBN 978-0-87220-330-3 . Duncan Ronald ed. 2011. Selected Writings of Mahatma Gandhi . Literary Licensing LLC. ISBN 978-1-258-00907-6 . Archived from the original on 1 October 2020 . Retrieved 4 September 2017 . Gandhi Mohandas Karamchand 1928. Satyagraha in South Africa in Gujarati 1st ed.. Ahmedabad: Navajivan Publishing House. Translated by Valji G. Desai Gandhi Mohandas Karamchand 1994. The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi . Publications Division Ministry of Information and Broadcasting Govt. of India. ISBN 978-81-230-0239-2 . 100 volumes. Free online access from Gandhiserve. Gandhi Mohandas Karamchand 1928. Drain Inspectors Report . The United States of India . 5 68: 34. Gandhi Mohandas Karamchand 1990a. Desai Mahadev H. ed.. Autobiography: The Story of My Experiments With Truth . Mineola N.Y.: Dover. ISBN 0-486-24593-4 . Gandhi Mohandas Karamchand 2002. Fischer Louis ed.. The Essential Gandhi: An Anthology of His Writings on His Life Work and Ideas 2nd ed.. Vintage Books. ISBN 978-1-4000-3050-7 . Jack Homer A. ed. 1994. The Gandhi Reader: A Source Book of His Life and Writings . Grove Press. ISBN 978-0-8021-3161-4 . Johnson Richard L. ed. 2006. Gandhis Experiments with Truth: Essential Writings by and about Mahatma Gandhi . Lexington Books. ISBN 978-0-7391-1143-7 . Parel Anthony J. ed. 2009. Gandhi: Hind Swaraj and Other Writings Centenary Edition . Cambridge University Press . ISBN 978-0-521-14602-9 . External links Mahatma Gandhi at Wikipedias sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Gandhis correspondence with the Indian government 19421944 About Mahatma Gandhi Gandhi at Sabarmati Ashram Works by Mahatma Gandhi at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Mahatma Gandhi at the Internet Archive Works by Mahatma Gandhi at LibriVox public domain audiobooks Newspaper clippings about Mahatma Gandhi in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW v t e Mahatma Gandhi Life events and movements Indian Ambulance Corps Tolstoy Farm Bardoli Satyagraha Champaran Satyagraha Kheda Satyagraha Indian independence movement Non-cooperation movement Chauri Chaura incident Purna Swaraj flag Salt March Dharasana Satyagraha Vaikom Satyagraha Aundh Experiment GandhiIrwin Pact Second Round Table Conference Padayatra Poona Pact Natal Indian Congress Quit India speech Gujarat Vidyapith University Harijan Sevak Sangh India ashrams Kochrab Sabarmati Sodepur Khadi Sevagram List of fasts Assassination Philosophy Practices and beliefs Composite nationalism Gandhism Economics trusteeship Education Sarvodaya Satyagraha Swadeshi Swaraj Eleven vows Gandhi cap Publications Harijan Hind Swaraj Indian Home Rule Indian Opinion The Story of My Experiments with Truth Mangal Prabhat Young India Seven Social Sins Navajivan Trust Gandhi Heritage Portal Influences A Letter to a Hindu Ahimsa nonviolence Bhagavad Gita Henry David Thoreau Civil Disobedience essay Civil disobedience Fasting Hinduism Khadi John Ruskin Parsee Rustomjee Leo Tolstoy The Kingdom of God Is Within You The Masque of Anarchy Narmad Pacifism Sermon on the Mount Shravan Shrimad Rajchandra Henry Stephens Salt Tirukkural Unto This Last Gandhis translation Raghupati Raghava Raja Ram Ekla Chalo Re Hari Tuma Haro Vaishnava Jana To Vegetarianism Associates Swami Anand C. F. Andrews Jamnalal Bajaj Shankarlal Banker Sarla Behn Vinoba Bhave Brij Krishna Chandiwala Sudhakar Chaturvedi Jugatram Dave Mahadev Desai Dada Dharmadhikari Kanu Gandhi Shiv Prasad Gupta Umar Hajee Ahmed Jhaveri J. C. Kumarappa Hermann Kallenbach Abdul Ghaffar Khan Acharya Kripalani Mirabehn Mohanlal Pandya Vallabhbhai Patel Narhari Parikh Mithuben Petit Chakravarti Rajagopalachari Bibi Amtus Salam Sonja Schlesin Anugrah Narayan Sinha Sri Krishna Sinha Rettamalai Srinivasan V. A. Sundaram Abbas Tyabji Ravishankar Vyas Kishorlal Mashruwala Legacy Artistic depictions Gandhigiri Gandhi Peace Award Gandhi Peace Foundation Gandhi Peace Prize Mahatma Gandhi Kashi Vidyapith Indian currency Gandhi Series Gandhi New Series Indian rupee Indian 10 Rupee postage stamp Family Karamchand Gandhi father Kasturba wife Harilal son Manilal son Ramdas son Devdas son Maganlal cousin Samaldas nephew Arun grandson Ela granddaughter Rajmohan grandson Gopalkrishna grandson Ramchandra grandson Kanu grandson Kanu grandnephew Tushar great-grandson Leela great-granddaughter Influenced 14th Dalai Lama Aung San Suu Kyi Abhay Bang Abdul Ghaffar Khan Brajkishore Prasad C. Rajagopalachari Eknath Easwaran Draupadi Murmu Francois Bayrou Gopaldas Ambaidas Desai Govind Vallabh Pant Ho Chi Minh James Bevel James Lawson Jawaharlal Nehru Joan Bondurant Lal Bahadur Shastri Lanza del Vasto Maulana Azad Martin Luther King Jr. Maria Lacerda de Moura Mehdi Bazargan Morarji Desai Narendra Modi Nelson Mandela Rajendra Prasad Ramjee Singh Steve Biko Sane Guruji Vinoba Bhave Vallabhbhai Patel Memorials Statues Ghana India Patna National Salt Satyagraha Memorial New Delhi South Africa Johannesburg Pietermaritzburg UK Parliament Square Tavistock Square U.S. Davis Denver Houston Milwaukee New York San Francisco San Jose Washington D.C. Observances Gandhi Jayanti International Day of Non-Violence Martyrs Day Season for Nonviolence Other Aga Khan Palace Gandhi Bhawan Gandhi Mandapam Gandhi Market Bookstores Gandhi Promenade Gandhi Smriti Gandhi Memorial Gandhi Memorial Museum Madurai Gandhi Teerth Gandhi Temple Bhatara Kaba Gandhi No Delo Kirti Mandir Mahatma Gandhi College Mahatma Gandhi Marine National Park Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Centre Matale Mani Bhavan Mohandas Gandhi High School National Gandhi Museum Raj Ghat Roads named after Gandhi Sabarmati Ashram Satyagraha House Articles related to Mahatma Gandhi v t e Hindu reform movements Reform movements Adi Dharm Brahmoism Brahmo Samaj Sadharan Brahmo Samaj Advait Mat Divine Light Mission American Meditation Institute Ananda Ananda Ashrama Ananda Marga Anandamayee Sangha Art of Living Arya Samaj Ayyavazhi Brahma Kumaris Chinmaya Mission Datta Yoga Divine Life Society Hanuman Foundation Himalayan Institute of Yoga Science and Philosophy Hindu nationalism Hindutva Hindu Janajagruti Samiti Hindu Mahasabha Hindu Munnani Hindu Sena Hindu Yuva Vahini Sanatan Sanstha Sangh Parivar Vishva Hindu Parishad Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh International Vedanta ISKCON ISKCON Revival Isha Foundation Kriya Yoga Mahima Dharma Mata Amritanandamayi Math Matua Mahasangha Narayana Dharma Prarthana Samaj Ramakrishna Mission Vedanta Societies Ravidassia Sahaja Yoga Sant Mat Radha Soami Sathya Sai Baba Satsang Satya Dharma Satyashodhak Samaj Science of Identity Self-Realization Fellowship Yogoda Satsanga Shirdi Sai Baba Sivananda yoga Sri Aurobindo Ashram Sri Ramana Ashram Abidance in Truth Swadhyay Parivar NNDYM Transcendental Meditation Topics Bhakti Brahmacharya Caste Ghar Wapsi Moksha Neo-Vedanta Persecution of Hindus Shuddhi Women in Hinduism Gurus and revivalist writers Meher Baba Amritanandamayi Ananda Yogi Anandamayi Ma Anukulchandra Chakravarty Arumuka Navalar Athavale Aurobindo Boro Maa Chatterjee Chinmayananda Saraswati Chinmoy Dayananda Saraswati Daya Mata Ganapathi Sachchidananda Haidakhan Babaji Hariharananda Giri Jaggi Vasudev Jyotirao Phule Kalki Bhagawan Kelkar N. C. Kriyananda Lekhraj Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Mahatma Gandhi Mirra Alfassa Narayana Guru Neem Karoli Nirmala Paramananda Prem Rawat Ram Chandra Ram Dass Ram Mohan Roy Ramakrishna Ramana Maharshi Ravi Shankar Sarkar Sathya Sai Baba Savarkar Sen K. C. Shraddhanand Sister Nivedita Sivananda Swami Rama Tagore D. Tilak Vaswani Vipulananda Vishnudevananda Vivekananda Yogananda more General Indian diaspora Indianisation Influence of Indian religions Indian-origin religions Hinduism Buddhism Jainism Sikhism Persecution of Hindus v t e Indian independence movement History Colonisation Porto Grande de Bengala Dutch Bengal East India Company British Raj French India Portuguese India Battle of Plassey Battle of Buxar Anglo-Mysore Wars First Second Third Fourth Anglo-Maratha Wars First Second Third Gwalior Polygar Wars Vellore Mutiny First Anglo-Sikh War Second Anglo-Sikh War Sannyasi rebellion Rebellion of 1857 Radcliffe Line more Philosophies and ideologies Ambedkarism Gandhism Hindu nationalism Indian nationalism Khilafat Movement Muslim nationalism in South Asia Satyagraha Socialism Swadeshi movement Swaraj Events and movements Partition of Bengal 1905 Partition of Bengal 1947 Revolutionaries Direct Action Day Delhi-Lahore Conspiracy The Indian Sociologist Singapore Mutiny HinduGerman Conspiracy Champaran Satyagraha Kheda Satyagraha Rowlatt Committee Rowlatt Bills Jallianwala Bagh massacre Noakhali riots Non-cooperation movement Christmas Day Plot Coolie-Begar movement Chauri Chaura incident 1922 Kakori conspiracy Qissa Khwani massacre Flag Satyagraha Bardoli 1928 Protests Nehru Report Fourteen Points of Jinnah Purna Swaraj Salt March Dharasana Satyagraha Vedaranyam March Chittagong armoury raid GandhiIrwin Pact Round table conferences Act of 1935 Aundh Experiment Indian Legion Cripps Mission Quit India Bombay Mutiny Royal Air Force strikes Coup detat of Yanaon Provisional Government of India Independence Day Praja Mandala movement Lucknow Pact Organisations All India Kisan Sabha All-India Muslim League Anushilan Samiti Arya Samaj Azad Hind Berlin Committee Ghadar Movement Hindustan Socialist Republican Association Indian National Congress India House Indian Home Rule movement Indian Independence League Indian National Army Jugantar Khaksar movement Khudai Khidmatgar Swaraj Party more Social reformers Ashfaqulla Khan A. Vaidyanatha Iyer Ayya Vaikundar Ayyankali B. R. Ambedkar Baba Amte Bal Gangadhar Tilak Dayananda Saraswati Dhondo Keshav Karve G. Subramania Iyer Gazulu Lakshminarasu Chetty Gopal Ganesh Agarkar Gopal Hari Deshmukh Gopaldas Ambaidas Desai Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar J. B. Kripalani Jyotirao Phule Kandukuri Veeresalingam Mahadev Govind Ranade Mahatma Gandhi Muthulakshmi Reddy Narayana Guru Niralamba Swami Pandita Ramabai Periyar Ram Mohan Roy Rettamalai Srinivasan Sahajanand Saraswati Savitribai Phule Shahu Sister Nivedita Sri Aurobindo Syed Ahmad Khan Vakkom Moulavi Vinayak Damodar Savarkar Vinoba Bhave Vitthal Ramji Shinde Vivekananda Independence activists Abul Kalam Azad Accamma Cherian Achyut Patwardhan A. K. Fazlul Huq Alluri Sitarama Raju Annapurna Maharana Annie Besant Ashfaqulla Khan Babu Kunwar Singh Bagha Jatin Bahadur Shah II Bakht Khan Bal Gangadhar Tilak Basawon Singh Begum Hazrat Mahal Bhagat Singh Bharathidasan Bhavabhushan Mitra Bhikaiji Cama Bhupendra Kumar Datta Bidhan Chandra Roy Bipin Chandra Pal C. Rajagopalachari Chandra Shekhar Azad Chetram Jatav Chittaranjan Das Dadabhai Naoroji Dayananda Saraswati Dhan Singh Dukkipati Nageswara Rao Gopal Krishna Gokhale Govind Ballabh Pant Har Dayal Hemu Kalani Inayatullah Khan Mashriqi Jatindra Mohan Sengupta Jatindra Nath Das Jawaharlal Nehru K. Kamaraj Kanaiyalal Maneklal Munshi Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan Khudiram Bose Shri Krishna Singh Lala Lajpat Rai M. Bhaktavatsalam M. N. Roy Maghfoor Ahmad Ajazi Mahadaji Shinde Mahatma Gandhi Mangal Pandey Mir Qasim Mithuben Petit Mohammad Ali Jauhar Muhammad Ali Jinnah Muhammad Mian Mansoor Ansari Nagnath Naikwadi Nana Fadnavis Nana Saheb P. Kakkan Prafulla Chaki Pritilata Waddedar Purushottam Das Tandon R. Venkataraman Rahul Sankrityayan Rajendra Prasad Ram Prasad Bismil Rani Lakshmibai Rash Behari Bose Sahajanand Saraswati Sangolli Rayanna Sarojini Naidu Satyapal Dang Shuja-ud-Daula Shyamji Krishna Varma Sibghatullah Shah Rashidi Siraj ud-Daulah Subhas Chandra Bose Subramania Bharati Subramaniya Siva Surya Sen Syama Prasad Mukherjee Tara Rani Srivastava Tarak Nath Das Tatya Tope Tiruppur Kumaran Ubaidullah Sindhi V. O. Chidamabaram V. K. Krishna Menon Vallabhbhai Patel Vanchinathan Veeran Sundaralingam Vinayak Damodar Savarkar Virendranath Chattopadhyaya Yashwantrao Holkar Yogendra Shukla more British leaders Wavell Canning Cornwallis Irwin Chelmsford Curzon Ripon Minto Dalhousie Bentinck Mountbatten Wellesley Lytton Clive Outram Cripps Linlithgow Hastings Independence Cabinet Mission Constitution Republic of India Indian annexation of Goa Indian Independence Act Partition of India Political integration Simla Conference v t e Indian National Congress History History of the Indian National Congress Electoral history NehruGandhi family The Emergency Indian National Congress Organisation Indian National Congress R Indian National Congress I Breakaway parties Organisation President All India Congress Committee Congress Working Committee Regional Congress Committee Pradesh Andhra Pradesh Arunachal Pradesh Assam Bihar Chhattisgarh Delhi Goa Gujarat Haryana Himachal Pradesh Jammu and Kashmir Jharkhand Karnataka Kerala Madhya Pradesh Maharashtra Manipur Meghalaya Mizoram Nagaland Odisha Puducherry Punjab Rajasthan Sikkim Tamil Nadu Telangana Tripura Uttarakhand Uttar Pradesh West Bengal Territorial Andaman and Nicobar Chandigarh Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu Dadra and Nagar Haveli Diu Daman and Diu Ladakh Lakshadweep Other Mumbai RCC Presidents Womesh Chunder Bonnerjee Dadabhai Naoroji Badruddin Tyabji George Yule William Wedderburn Pherozeshah Mehta Anandacharlu Womesh Chunder Bonnerjee Dadabhai Naoroji Webb Surendranath Banerjee Rahimtulla M. Sayani C. Sankaran Nair Anandamohan Bose Romesh Chunder Dutt N. G. Chandavarkar Dinshaw Edulji Wacha Surendranath Banerjee Lalmohan Ghosh Henry Cotton Gopal Krishna Gokhale Dadabhai Naoroji Rash Behari Ghosh Madan Mohan Malaviya William Wedderburn Bishan Narayan Dar Raghunath Narasinha Mudholkar Nawab Syed Muhammad Bahadur Bhupendra Nath Bose Satyendra Prasanna Sinha 1st Baron Sinha Ambica Charan Mazumdar Annie Besant Madan Mohan Malaviya Syed Hasan Imam Motilal Nehru Lala Lajpat Rai C. Vijayaraghavachariar Hakim Ajmal Khan Chittaranjan Das Mohammad Ali Jauhar Abul Kalam Azad Mahatma Gandhi Sarojini Naidu S. Srinivasa Iyengar Mukhtar Ahmed Ansari Motilal Nehru Jawaharlal Nehru Vallabhbhai Patel Madan Mohan Malaviya Nellie Sengupta Rajendra Prasad Jawaharlal Nehru Subhas Chandra Bose Abul Kalam Azad J. B. Kripalani Bhogaraju Pattabhi Sitaramayya Purushottam Das Tandon Jawaharlal Nehru U. N. Dhebar Indira Gandhi Neelam Sanjiva Reddy K. Kamaraj S. Nijalingappa Jagjivan Ram Shankar Dayal Sharma D. K. Barooah Indira Gandhi Rajiv Gandhi P. V. Narasimha Rao Sitaram Kesri Sonia Gandhi Rahul Gandhi Mallikarjun Kharge Prime ministers Jawaharlal Nehru Lal Bahadur Shastri Gulzarilal Nanda Indira Gandhi Rajiv Gandhi P. V. Narasimha Rao Manmohan Singh Leaders Lok Sabha Jawaharlal Nehru Gulzarilal Nanda Lal Bahadur Shastri Satya Narayan Indira Gandhi Yashwantrao Chavan Chembakassery Mathai Stephen Rajiv Gandhi Arjun Singh P. V. Narasimha Rao Sharad Pawar Sonia Gandhi Pranab Mukherjee Sushilkumar Shinde Rahul Gandhi Rajya Sabha N. Gopalaswamy Ayyangar Charu Chandra Lal Bahadur Shastri Govind Ballabh Hafiz Mohamad Ibrahim Yashwantrao Chavan Jaisukhlal Hathi M. C. Chagla Jaisukhlal Hathi Kodardas Kalidas Shah Uma Shankar Dikshit Kamalapati Tripathi Pranab Mukherjee V.P. Singh Narayan Dutt Tiwari P. Shiv Shankar Shankarrao Chavan Motilal Vora Ahmed Patel Anand Sharma Jairam Ramesh A. K. Antony Digvijaya Singh P. Chidambaram Abhishek Singhvi Rajeev Shukla Manmohan Singh Ghulam Nabi Azad Mallikarjun Kharge Political wings Seva Dal All India Mahila Congress Indian Youth Congress National Students Union of India Indian National Trade Union Congress All India Professionals Congress Chief ministers Current Sukhvinder Singh Sukhu Siddaramaiah Anumula Revanth Reddy Category v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Augustine Cicero Confucius Lactantius Laozi Mencius Mozi Origen Philo Plato Plutarch Polybius Tertullian Thucydides Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Dante Gelasius Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Muhammad Photios Plethon Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Muntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvetius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Stael Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guenon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Koakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Ropke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Zizek Works De Officiis 44 BC Oration on the Dignity of Man 1486 A Vindication of Natural Society 1756 Democracy in America 18351840 Civilization and Its Discontents 1930 The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction 1935 The Second Sex 1949 One-Dimensional Man 1964 The Society of the Spectacle 1967 The History of Sexuality 1976 The Culture of Narcissism 1979 A Conflict of Visions 1987 The Closing of the American Mind 1987 Gender Trouble 1990 The Malaise of Modernity 1991 Intellectuals and Society 2010 See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Oligarchy Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Alpharabius Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boetie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Muntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suarez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortes Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal political philosophy Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Stael Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guenon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Ropke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic c. 375 BC Politics c. 350 BC De re publica 51 BC Treatise on Law c. 1274 Monarchia 1313 The Prince 1532 Leviathan 1651 Two Treatises of Government 1689 The Spirit of Law 1748 The Social Contract 1762 Reflections on the Revolution in France 1790 Rights of Man 1791 Elements of the Philosophy of Right 1820 Democracy in America 18351840 The Communist Manifesto 1848 On Liberty 1859 The Revolt of the Masses 1929 The Road to Serfdom 1944 The Open Society and Its Enemies 1945 The Origins of Totalitarianism 1951 A Theory of Justice 1971 The End of History and the Last Man 1992 Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Machiavellianism Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Index Category:Political philosophy v t e Simple living Practices Barter Cord-cutting DIY ethic Downshifting Dry toilet Fasting Forest gardening Freeganism Frugality Gift economy Intentional community Local currency Low-impact development No frills Off-the-grid Permaculture Regift Sattvic diet Self-sufficiency Slow living Slow movement culture Subsistence agriculture Sustainable living Sustainable sanitation Veganism Vegetarianism War tax resistance WWOOF Religious and spiritual Amish Aparigraha Asceticism Detachment Distributism Jesus movement Mendicant Mindfulness Monasticism New Monasticism Plain dress Plain people Quakers Rastafari Temperance Testimony of simplicity Tolstoyan movement Twelve Tribes communities Secular movements Back-to-the-land Car-free Environmental Hippie Open Source Ecology Slow Small house Tiny house Transition town Notable writers Wendell Berry Ernest Callenbach G. K. Chesterton Duane Elgin Mahatma Gandhi Richard Gregg Tom Hodgkinson Harlan Hubbard Satish Kumar Helen Nearing Scott Nearing Peace Pilgrim Nick Rosen Dugald Semple E. F. Schumacher George Skene Keith Henry David Thoreau Leo Tolstoy Valluvar Modern-day adherents Mark Boyle Robin Greenfield Ted Kaczynski Pentti Linkola Jim Merkel Peace Pilgrim Suelo Thomas Media Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral Escape from Affluenza The Good Life The Moon and the Sledgehammer Mother Earth News The Power of Half Small Is Beautiful Walden Related Affluenza Agrarianism Amateurism Anarcho-primitivism Anti-consumerism Appropriate technology Bohemianism Consumerism Critique of work Deep ecology Degrowth Ecological footprint Food miles Front Porch Republic Green anarchism The good life Global warming Hedonophobia Intentional living commune Rainbow Gathering Itinerant Low-technology Nonviolence Peak oil Sustainability Worklife interface v t e Veganism and vegetarianism Perspectives Veganism Animal-free agriculture Black veganism Fruitarianism History Raw veganism Straight edge Hardline Nutrition Vegan organic agriculture Vegan school meal Vegan studies Vegetarianism Economic vegetarianism Environmental vegetarianism History Orthopathy Lacto vegetarianism Lacto-ovo vegetarianism Ovo vegetarianism Cuisine Vegetarian Diet Pyramid Ecofeminism Nutrition By country Lists Vegetarians Vegans Fictional characters Festivals Organizations Restaurants Vegan media Ethics Secular Animal rights Animal welfare Carnism Deep ecology Environmental vegetarianism Ethics of eating meat Meat paradox Nonviolence Replaceability argument Sentientism Speciesism Tirukkural Religious Buddhism Christianity Seventh-day Adventist Church Hinduism Sattvic Ahimsa Islam Jainism Judaism Pythagoreanism Rastafari Sikhism Taoism Food and drink Agave syrup Chicken fillet roll Coconut burger Dairy alternatives Coconut milk Plant cream Plant milk Soy yogurt Cheese Fruits Grains cereals legumes Gelatin substitutes Agar Carrageenan Gulaman Konjac jelly Microbial cellulose Jambon Meat alternative List of meat substitutes Miso Mochi Mock duck Nutritional yeast Quinoa Quorn Seitan Tempeh Tofu Tofurkey Vegetables Vegetarian bacon Hot dog Vegetarian mark Sausage Sausage roll Beer Wine Veggie burger Groups and events Vegan American Vegan Society Beauty Without Cruelty Food Empowerment Project Go Vegan Nederlandse Vereniging voor Veganisme Our Hen House Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine Plamil Foods Vegan Awareness Foundation Vegan flag Vegan Outreach Vegan Prisoners Support Group The Vegan Society Veganmania Veganuary Veganz World Vegan Day Vegetarian Alcott House Bible Christian Church Boston Vegetarian Society Christian Vegetarian Association European Vegetarian Union French Vegetarian Society Hare Krishna Food for Life International Vegetarian Union Jewish Veg Meat-free days Meatless Monday Friday Fast North American Vegetarian Society Order of the Golden Age ProVeg Deutschland ProVeg International ProVeg Nederland Swissveg Toronto Vegetarian Association Vegetarian Federal Union Vegetarian Society Vegetarian Society Singapore Veggie Pride Viva! Health World Esperantist Vegetarian Association World Vegetarian Day Companies List of vegetarian and vegan companies Books reports journals On Abstinence from Eating Animals 3rd century An Essay on Abstinence from Animal Food as a Moral Duty 1802 Vegetable Cookery 1812 A Vindication of Natural Diet 1813 Reasons for not Eating Animal Food 1814 Moral Inquiries on the Situation of Man and of Brutes 1824 Natures Own Book 1835 Fruits and Farinacea 1845 The Pleasure Boat 1845 The Ethics of Diet 1883 What is Vegetarianism? 1886 Shelleys Vegetarianism 1891 Behind the Scenes in Slaughter-Houses 1892 Why I Am a Vegetarian 1895 Figs or Pigs? 1896 Fifty Years of Food Reform 1898 Thirty-nine Reasons Why I Am a Vegetarian 1903 The Meat Fetish 1904 The New Ethics 1907 A Fleshless Diet 1910 The Benefits of Vegetarianism 1927 Living the Good Life 1954 Ten Talents 1968 Diet for a Small Planet 1971 The Vegetarian Epicure 1972 Moosewood Collective Cookbooks 1973 The Farm Vegetarian Cookbook 1975 Laurels Kitchen 1976 Moosewood Cookbook 1977 Fit for Life 1985 Diet for a New America 1987 The Sexual Politics of Meat 1990 Vegetarian Cooking for Everyone 1997 The China Study 2005 Skinny Bitch 2005 Livestocks Long Shadow 2006 The Bloodless Revolution 2006 Eating Animals 2009 Why We Love Dogs Eat Pigs and Wear Cows 2009 The Vegan Studies Project 2015 Animal Deliberation 2016 The End of Animal Farming 2018 Vegetable Kingdom 2020 Making a Stand for Animals 2022 Meat Atlas annual Films and shows The Animals Film 1981 Diet for a New America film 1991 A Cow at My Table 1998 Meet Your Meat 2002 Post Punk Kitchen 20032005 Peaceable Kingdom 2004 Earthlings 2005 A Sacred Duty 2007 Fat Sick and Nearly Dead 2010 Planeat 2010 Forks Over Knives 2011 Vegucated 2011 Live and Let Live 2013 Cowspiracy 2014 PlantPure Nation 2015 What the Health 2017 Carnage 2017 Dominion 2018 Eating You Alive 2018 The Game Changers 2018 Maa Ka Doodh 2023 You Are What You Eat: A Twin Experiment 2024 Magazines Naked Food Satya Vegetarian Times VegNews The Animals Agenda Academics activists authors physicians Vegan Elisa Aaltola Carol J. Adams Suzanne M. Babich Martin Balluch Neal D. Barnard David Benatar Steven Best Yves Bonnardel Will Bonsall Will Bulsiewicz Georges Butaud Jodey Castricano T. Colin Campbell Robert Cook Brenda Davis Garth Davis Jan Deckers Alan Desmond George Dornbusch Mylan Engel Caldwell Esselstyn Gary L. Francione Joel Fuhrman Kristi Funk Valery Giroux Lewis Gompertz Michael Greger A. Breeze Harper Oscar Horta Melanie Joy Joel Kahn Avery Yale Kamila Michael Klaper Aph Ko Renan Larue Maxwell G. Lee Thomas Lepeltier Howard Lyman Al-Maarri Reed Mangels John A. McDougall James E. McWilliams Vesanto Melina Gemma Newman David Nibert Jack Norris David Olivier David Pearce Emelia Quinn Tom Regan Jerome Segal Peter Singer David Sztybel Sunaura Taylor Richard Twine Kim A. Williams Corey Lee Wrenn Laura Wright Sophie Zaikowska Vegetarian Phyllis B. Acosta William Alcott Bertrand P. Allinson Thomas Allinson Charles R. Attwood William Axon Eduard Baltzer Horace A. Barrows Geoffrey Barstow Sidney H. Beard George Bedborough Ernest Bell Robert Bell Ragnar Berg Rynn Berry Maximilian Bircher-Benner George Black Ernest Bonnejoy Lucius Duncan Bulkley J. L. Buttner Paul Carton Job Caudwell James Clark George Cheyne Henry S. Clubb Antonio Cocchi Edwin Collier Lenna F. Cooper Daniel de Clercq Daniel Dombrowski James Elmslie Duncan Eknath Easwaran T. Forster Charles W. Forward Michael Allen Fox Peter Foxcroft Greta Gaard Mahatma Gandhi Narasinh Narayan Godbole Jeremiah Hacker John Haddon Walter Hadwen Alexander Haig Edward Hare William Harvey Philippe Hecquet Brian Hines Martin Luther Holbrook Isaac Jennings John Harvey Kellogg Norman Kerr Daniel H. Kress William Lambe W. R. C. Latson Elmer Lee Susan M. Levin Andrew Linzey Clair Linzey Jacques de Marquette Alice Garrett Marsh Elmer McCollum William Metcalfe Eli Peck Miller Harry Willis Miller J. Howard Moore Reuben D. Mussey Helen Nearing Scott Nearing Francis William Newman R. E. OCallaghan Josiah Oldfield Dean Ornish Felix Ortt Cyril V. Pink A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada Rod Preece James Rachels Ulma Doyle Register Rollo Russell Henry Stephens Salt Johan Lindstrom Saxon James Scholefield Richard H. Schwartz James Simpson Ernest Lester Smith William O. Stephens Alan Stoddard Russell Thacher Trall Frederick Towgood Sidney Trist Valluvar Emil Weilshauser Ellen G. White Severin Wielobycki Howard Williams Frank Wokes W. A. Sibly Jon Wynne-Tyson Tzachi Zamir Kathleen Keen Zolber Chefs and cookbook authors Nava Atlas Mayim Bialik Carleigh Bodrug Gypsy Boots BOSH! Martha Brotherton Edward Espe Brown Tabitha Brown actress Suzy Amis Cameron Hannah Che Pinky Cole Chloe Coscarelli Yamuna Devi Sue Donaldson Crescent Dragonwagon Rose Elliot Rip Esselstyn Toni Fiore Carol Lee Flinders Alexis Gauthier Dick Gregory Richa Hingle Madhur Jaffrey Mollie Katzen Frances Moore Lappe Deborah Madison Linda McCartney Mary McCartney Hetty Lui McKinnon Tracye McQuirter Joanne Lee Molinaro Moosewood Collective Charity Morgan Isa Chandra Moskowitz Bawa Muhaiyaddeen Gaz Oakley Colleen Patrick-Goudreau Mathew Pritchard Satchidananda Saraswati Derek Sarno Miyoko Schinner Alicia Silverstone Hannah Sunderani Bryant Terry Anna Thomas Haile Thomas Lauren Toyota Jeeca Uy Umberto Veronesi Nisha Vora Alan Wakeman Joe Yonan Restaurants Ben Esthers Vegan Jewish Deli Cinnaholic Crossroads Kitchen Green Elephant Vegetarian Bistro Greens Restaurant Hiltl Restaurant Little Pine restaurant Moosewood Restaurant Purezza Slutty Vegan Souley Vegan The Sound Lounge London Veggie Galaxy Veggie Grill Former restaurants Cranks restaurant Food for Thought restaurant InSpiral Lounge Lentil as Anything Minerva Cafe New Riverside Cafe Nix restaurant Penny Cafeteria Pink Peacock The Hollow Reed The Pitman Vegetarian Hotel Related Vegetarian and vegan symbolism List of vegan media Juice fasting Vegetarian and vegan dog diet Vegaphobia Plant-based diet Plant-based action plan Sustainable diet Low-carbon Planetary health Flexitarianism Pescetarianism Pollotarianism v t e Modern Hindu writers 1848 to date Hinduism Hinduism in the West Indian philosophy Indian religions Religious writers Mirra Alfassa The Mother Sri Anirvan Sri Aurobindo Ananda Coomaraswamy Dayananda Eknath Easwaran Satsvarupa dasa Goswami Mahendranath Gupta Jiddu Krishnamurti Nisargadatta Maharaj Ramana Maharshi A. G. Mohan Sister Nivedita Swami Prabhavananda A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada Krishna Prem Swami Rama Srivatsa Ramaswami Swami Ramdas Chinmayananda Saraswati Dayananda Saraswati Arya Samaj Krishnananda Saraswati Sivananda Saraswati Swami Satprakashananda Swami Shraddhanand Ram Swarup Swami Vivekananda Paramahansa Yogananda Political writers Mahatma Gandhi Francois Gautier Sita Ram Goel Ram Gopal Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan Arun Shourie Bal Gangadhar Tilak Kartik Oraon Vinayak Damodar Savarkar Jaswant Singh Literary writers Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay Ramdhari Singh Dinkar C. Rajagopalachari K. D. Sethna Amish Tripathi Vinayak Damodar Savarkar Westerners influenced by Hinduism Annie Besant Helena Blavatsky Deepak Chopra Aleister Crowley Ram Dass Wayne Dyer T. S. Eliot R.W. Emerson Allen Ginsberg Rene Guenon George Harrison Aldous Huxley Christopher Isherwood David Lynch Andre Malraux Henry Miller Maria Montessori H.S. Olcott Oppenheimer Helena Roerich Romain Rolland Arthur Schopenhauer Erwin Schrodinger Thoreau Leo Tolstoy Voltaire Alan Watts Ken Wilber W. B. Yeats Scholars Alain Danielou S. N. Balagangadhara Michel Danino Paul Deussen Dharampal Mircea Eliade Sister Gargi Georg Feuerstein Meenakshi Jain Klaus Klostermaier Hajime Nakamura Anantanand Rambachan Arvind Sharma Graham Schweig Lists List of modern Eastern religions writers List of writers on Hinduism Hinduism Portal India Portal v t e Critique of political economy 18th19th-century Friedrich Engels Karl Marx Thomas Carlyle John Ruskin Paul Lafargue Erik Johan Stagnelius 20th21st-century Jean Baudrillard Guy Debord Mahatma Gandhi Andre Gorz Moishe Postone Etienne Balibar Neue Marx-Lekture Helmut Reichelt Hans-Georg Backhaus Robert Kurz Michael Heinrich Mark Fisher Roman Rosdolsky Claus Peter Ortlieb Georges Bataille Katrine Marcal Concepts Abstract labour and concrete labour Capitalist mode of production Commodity Chrematistics Dismal Science Illth Law of value Socially necessary labour time Valorisation Value-form Written works Unto This Last Sarvodaya The Right to Be Lazy Das Kapital Grundrisse Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Mirror of Production A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marxs Capital Critique of Economic Reason Discourse on Inequality The Accursed Share Who cooked Adam Smiths dinner? Related Assume a can opener Classical economics Chrematistics Criticism of capitalism Critique of work Economic anthropology Economics Mainstream economics Occams razor v t e Time Persons of the Year 19271950 Charles Lindbergh 1927 Walter Chrysler 1928 Owen D. Young 1929 Mohandas Gandhi 1930 Pierre Laval 1931 Franklin D. Roosevelt 1932 Hugh S. Johnson 1933 Franklin D. Roosevelt 1934 Haile Selassie 1935 Wallis Simpson 1936 Chiang Kai-shek Soong Mei-ling 1937 Adolf Hitler 1938 Joseph Stalin 1939 Winston Churchill 1940 Franklin D. Roosevelt 1941 Joseph Stalin 1942 George Marshall 1943 Dwight D. Eisenhower 1944 Harry S. Truman 1945 James F. Byrnes 1946 George Marshall 1947 Harry S. Truman 1948 Winston Churchill 1949 The American Fighting-Man 1950 19511975 Mohammed Mosaddeq 1951 Elizabeth II 1952 Konrad Adenauer 1953 John Foster Dulles 1954 Harlow Curtice 1955 Hungarian Freedom Fighters 1956 Nikita Khrushchev 1957 Charles de Gaulle 1958 Dwight D. Eisenhower 1959 U.S. Scientists: George Beadle Charles Draper John Enders Donald A. Glaser Joshua Lederberg Willard Libby Linus Pauling Edward Purcell Isidor Rabi Emilio Segre William Shockley Edward Teller Charles Townes James Van Allen Robert Woodward 1960 John F. Kennedy 1961 Pope John XXIII 1962 Martin Luther King Jr. 1963 Lyndon B. Johnson 1964 William Westmoreland 1965 The Generation Twenty-Five and Under 1966 Lyndon B. Johnson 1967 The Apollo 8 Astronauts : William Anders Frank Borman Jim Lovell 1968 The Middle Americans 1969 Willy Brandt 1970 Richard Nixon 1971 Henry Kissinger Richard Nixon 1972 John Sirica 1973 King Faisal 1974 American Women: Susan Brownmiller Kathleen Byerly Alison Cheek Jill Conway Betty Ford Ella Grasso Carla Hills Barbara Jordan Billie Jean King Susie Sharp Carol Sutton Addie Wyatt 1975 19762000 Jimmy Carter 1976 Anwar Sadat 1977 Deng Xiaoping 1978 Ayatollah Khomeini 1979 Ronald Reagan 1980 Lech Waesa 1981 The Computer 1982 Ronald Reagan Yuri Andropov 1983 Peter Ueberroth 1984 Deng Xiaoping 1985 Corazon Aquino 1986 Mikhail Gorbachev 1987 The Endangered Earth 1988 Mikhail Gorbachev 1989 George H. W. Bush 1990 Ted Turner 1991 Bill Clinton 1992 The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat F. W. de Klerk Nelson Mandela Yitzhak Rabin 1993 Pope John Paul II 1994 Newt Gingrich 1995 David Ho 1996 Andrew Grove 1997 Bill Clinton Ken Starr 1998 Jeff Bezos 1999 George W. Bush 2000 2001present Rudolph Giuliani 2001 The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper Coleen Rowley Sherron Watkins 2002 The American Soldier 2003 George W. Bush 2004 The Good Samaritans: Bono Bill Gates Melinda Gates 2005 You 2006 Vladimir Putin 2007 Barack Obama 2008 Ben Bernanke 2009 Mark Zuckerberg 2010 The Protester 2011 Barack Obama 2012 Pope Francis 2013 Ebola Fighters : Dr. Jerry Brown Dr. Kent Brantly Ella Watson-Stryker Foday Gollah Salome Karwah 2014 Angela Merkel 2015 Donald Trump 2016 The Silence Breakers 2017 The Guardians: Jamal Khashoggi Maria Ressa Wa Lone Kyaw Soe Oo Staff of The Capital 2018 Greta Thunberg 2019 Joe Biden Kamala Harris 2020 Elon Musk 2021 Volodymyr Zelenskyy Spirit of Ukraine 2022 Taylor Swift 2023 v t e Asian of the Century The Big Five Deng Xiaoping Akio Morita Akira Kurosawa Charles K. Kao Mohandas K. Gandhi v t e Time 100: The Most Important People of the 20th Century Leaders revolutionaries David Ben-Gurion Winston Churchill Mahatma Gandhi Mikhail Gorbachev Adolf Hitler Ho Chi Minh Pope John Paul II Ruhollah Khomeini Martin Luther King Jr. Vladimir Lenin Nelson Mandela Mao Zedong Ronald Reagan Eleanor Roosevelt Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Margaret Sanger Margaret Thatcher Unknown Tiananmen Square rebel Lech Waesa Artists entertainers Louis Armstrong Lucille Ball The Beatles Marlon Brando Coco Chanel Charlie Chaplin Le Corbusier Bob Dylan T. S. Eliot Aretha Franklin Martha Graham Jim Henson James Joyce Pablo Picasso Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein Bart Simpson Frank Sinatra Steven Spielberg Igor Stravinsky Oprah Winfrey Builders titans Stephen Bechtel Sr. Leo Burnett Willis Carrier Walt Disney Henry Ford Bill Gates Amadeo Giannini Ray Kroc Estee Lauder William Levitt Lucky Luciano Louis B. Mayer Charles E. Merrill Akio Morita Walter Reuther Pete Rozelle David Sarnoff Juan Trippe Sam Walton Thomas J. Watson Jr. Scientists thinkers Leo Baekeland Tim Berners-Lee Rachel Carson Albert Einstein Philo Farnsworth Enrico Fermi Alexander Fleming Sigmund Freud Robert H. Goddard Kurt Godel Edwin Hubble John Maynard Keynes Leakey family Jean Piaget Jonas Salk William Shockley Alan Turing Francis Crick James Watson Ludwig Wittgenstein Wright brothers Heroes icons Muhammad Ali The American G.I. Lady Diana Spencer Anne Frank Billy Graham Che Guevara Edmund Hillary Tenzing Norgay Helen Keller Kennedy family Bruce Lee Charles Lindbergh Harvey Milk Marilyn Monroe Emmeline Pankhurst Rosa Parks Pele Jackie Robinson Andrei Sakharov Mother Teresa Bill W. Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands 2 Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece 2 Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People Trove Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef NARA SNAC 2 Te Papa New Zealand Retrieved from https:en.wikipedia.orgwindex.php?titleMahatmaGandhioldid1250952612 Categories : Mahatma Gandhi 1869 births 1948 deaths Politicians assassinated in the 1940s 19th-century Indian lawyers 19th-century Indian male writers 19th-century Indian philosophers 19th-century Indian writers 20th-century Indian male writers 20th-century Indian philosophers 20th-century Indian writers Alumni of the University of London Alumni of University College London Anti-imperialists AntiWorld War II activists Ascetics British Empire in World War II British military personnel of the Second Boer War Colony of Natal people Critics of political economy Deaths by firearm in India Founders of Indian schools and colleges Gujarati-language writers Gujarati people Hindu pacifists Hindu reformers Human rights activists Indian hunger strikers Indian activist journalists Indian animal rights activists Indian anti-poverty advocates Indian anti-war activists Indian autobiographers Indian barristers Indian civil rights activists Indian ethicists Indian expatriates in South Africa Indian expatriates in the United Kingdom Indian Hindus Indian memoirists Indian murder victims Indian nationalists Indian pacifists Indian people of World War II Indian political philosophers Indian revolutionaries Indian tax resisters Indian vegetarianism activists Family of Mahatma Gandhi Members of the Inner Temple Natal Indian Congress politicians Neo-Vedanta Indian nonviolence advocates People convicted of sedition People from Porbandar People murdered in Delhi Political prisoners Presidents of the Indian National Congress Prisoners and detainees of British India Recipients of the Kaisar-i-Hind Medal Simple living advocates South African Indian Congress politicians Cape Colony lawyers Swadeshi activists Time Person of the Year Tolstoyans Translators of the Bhagavad Gita Writers about activism and social change Writers from Gujarat Indian politicians assassinated in the 20th century Assassinated revolutionaries Presidents of the Gujarati Sahitya Parishad Hidden categories: Pages with Gujarati IPA Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2024 CS1 Maltese-language sources mt Pages with missing ISBNs CS1 maint: unfit URL CS1 Spanish-language sources es Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Good articles Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use Indian English from September 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Use dmy dates from September 2024 Articles with hAudio microformats Biography with signature Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2024 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from July 2024 CS1 Gujarati-language sources gu Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 13 October 2024 at 14:37 UTC . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view