Muhammad Ali - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Donate Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 1 Early life 2 Amateur career 3 Professional career Toggle Professional career subsection 3.1 Early career 3.2 World heavyweight champion 3.2.1 Fights against Liston 3.2.2 Fight against Patterson 3.2.3 Main Bout 4 Draft resistance Toggle Draft resistance subsection 4.1 Impact of Alis draft refusal 4.2 NSA and FBI monitoring of Alis communications 5 Exile and comeback Toggle Exile and comeback subsection 5.1 Protesting while exiled 5.2 The Super Fight 6 Return Toggle Return subsection 6.1 Fight against Joe Frazier 6.2 After his loss 6.2.1 Chamberlain challenge and Ellis fight 6.2.2 Fights against Quarry Patterson Foster Bugner and Norton 6.2.3 Second fight against Joe Frazier 6.3 World heavyweight champion second reign 6.3.1 The Rumble in the Jungle 6.3.2 Fights against Wepner Lyle and Bugner 6.3.3 Third fight against Joe Frazier 6.4 Later career 6.4.1 Fight stoppage vs. Larry Holmes 7 Exhibition bouts Toggle Exhibition bouts subsection 7.1 Ali vs Inoki 7.2 Ali vs Alzado 7.3 Ali vs Semenko 8 Personal life Toggle Personal life subsection 8.1 Marriages and children 8.1.1 Paternity claims 8.2 Religion and beliefs 8.2.1 Affiliation with the Nation of Islam 8.2.2 Conversion to SunniSufi Islam 8.3 Health 9 Entertainment career Toggle Entertainment career subsection 9.1 Acting 9.2 Spoken word poetry 9.3 Professional wrestling 9.4 Television appearances 9.5 Art 10 Later life Toggle Later life subsection 10.1 Philanthropy humanitarianism and politics 10.2 Earnings 10.3 Declining health 11 Death Toggle Death subsection 11.1 News coverage and tributes 11.2 Memorial 12 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 12.1 In boxing 12.2 In hip-hop 12.3 In Alis hometown 12.4 Around the US and world 12.5 20th-century superlatives 13 In media and popular culture 14 Professional boxing record 15 Discography 16 See also 17 Notes 18 References 19 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 19.1 Online 20 External links Toggle the table of contents Muhammad Ali 136 languages Aceh Afrikaans Alemannisch Aragones Arpetan Asturianu Aymar aru Azrbaycanca Ban-lam-gu Basa Banyumasan Bikol Central Bosanski Brezhoneg Catala Cestina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Espanol Esperanto Euskara Froyskt Francais Frysk Gaeilge Gaidhlig Galego Goychi Konknni Hausa Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Islenska Italiano Jawa Kiswahili Kurdi Latina Latviesu Letzebuergesch Lietuviu Lingala Lombard Magyar Malagasy Malti Bahasa Melayu Nahuatl Nederlands Napulitano Norsk bokmal Norsk nynorsk Ozbekcha Picard Piemonteis Polski Portugues Qaraqalpaqsha Romana Runa Simi Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovencina Slovenscina Soomaaliga srpski Srpskohrvatski Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog tatarca Turkce Tieng Viet Volapuk Walon West-Vlams Winaray Yoruba Zazaki Tolsi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia American boxer and activist 19422016 For other uses see Muhammad Ali disambiguation . Cassius Clay redirects here. For other uses see Cassius Clay disambiguation . Muhammad Ali Ali in 1967 Born Cassius Marcellus Clay Jr. 1942-01-17 January 17 1942 Louisville Kentucky U.S. Died June 3 2016 2016-06-03 aged 74 Scottsdale Arizona U.S. Resting place Cave Hill Cemetery Louisville Monuments Ali Mall Muhammad Ali Boulevard Muhammad Ali Center Louisville Muhammad Ali International Airport Citizenship United States Bangladesh honorary Education Central High School 1958 Spouses Sonji Roi m. 1964; div. 1966 Belinda Boyd m. 1967; div. 1977 Veronica Porche m. 1977; div. 1986 Yolanda Lonnie Williams m. 1986 Children 9 including Laila see below Parents Cassius Marcellus Clay Sr. Odessa Grady Clay Relatives Rahaman Ali brother Archer Alexander great-great-great grandfather Nico Ali Walsh grandson Awards Full list Boxing career Other names The Greatest The Peoples Champion The Louisville Lip Statistics Weights Heavyweight Height 6 ft 3 in 191 cm 1 Reach 78 in 198 cm 1 Stance Orthodox Boxing record Total fights 61 Wins 56 Wins by KO 37 Losses 5 Medal record Mens amateur boxing Representing United States Olympic Games 1960 Rome Light-heavyweight Intercity Golden Gloves 1959 Chicago Light-heavyweight 1960 New York Heavyweight Chicago Golden Gloves 1959 Chicago Light-heavyweight 1960 Chicago Light-heavyweight US National Championships 1959 Toledo Light-heavyweight 1960 Toledo Light-heavyweight Website muhammadali.com Signature Muhammad Ali l i ; 2 born Cassius Marcellus Clay Jr. ; January 17 1942 June 3 2016 was an American professional boxer and activist. Nicknamed the Greatest he is regarded as one of the most significant sports figures of the 20th century and is often regarded as the greatest heavyweight boxer of all time. He held the Ring magazine heavyweight title from 1964 to 1970. He was the undisputed champion from 1974 to 1978 and the WBA and Ring heavyweight champion from 1978 to 1979. In 1999 he was named Sportsman of the Century by Sports Illustrated and the Sports Personality of the Century by the BBC . Born and raised in Louisville Kentucky he began training as an amateur boxer at age 12. At 18 he won a gold medal in the light heavyweight division at the 1960 Summer Olympics and turned professional later that year. He converted to Islam after 1961. He won the world heavyweight championship defeating Sonny Liston in a major upset on February 25 1964 at age 22. During that year he denounced his birth name as a slave name and formally changed his name to Muhammad Ali. In 1967 Ali refused to be drafted into the military owing to his religious beliefs and ethical opposition to the Vietnam War and was found guilty of draft evasion and stripped of his boxing titles. He stayed out of prison while appealing the decision to the Supreme Court where his conviction was overturned in 1971. He did not fight for nearly four years and lost a period of peak performance as an athlete. Alis actions as a conscientious objector to the Vietnam War made him an icon for the larger counterculture of the 1960s generation and he was a very high-profile figure of racial pride for African Americans during the civil rights movement and throughout his career. As a Muslim Ali was initially affiliated with Elijah Muhammad s Nation of Islam NOI. He later disavowed the NOI adhering to Sunni Islam . He fought in several historic boxing matches including his highly publicized fights with Sonny Liston Joe Frazier including the Fight of the Century the biggest boxing event up until then the Thrilla in Manila and his fight with George Foreman in The Rumble in the Jungle . Ali thrived in the spotlight at a time when many boxers let their managers do the talking and he became renowned for his provocative and outlandish persona. He was famous for trash-talking often free-styled with rhyme schemes and spoken word poetry and has been recognized as a pioneer in hip hop . He often predicted in which round he would knock out his opponent. As a boxer Ali was known for his unorthodox movement fancy footwork head movement and rope-a-dope technique among others. Outside boxing Ali attained success as a spoken word artist releasing two studio albums: I Am the Greatest! 1963 and The Adventures of Ali and His Gang vs. Mr. Tooth Decay 1976. Both albums received Grammy Award nominations. He also featured as an actor and writer releasing two autobiographies. Ali retired from boxing in 1981 and focused on religion philanthropy and activism. In 1984 he made public his diagnosis of Parkinsons syndrome which some reports attributed to boxing-related injuries though he and his specialist physicians disputed this. He remained an active public figure globally but in his later years made fewer public appearances as his condition worsened and he was cared for by his family. Early life Cassius Marcellus Clay Jr. 3 k s was born on January 17 1942 in Louisville Kentucky . 4 He had one brother. He was named after his father Cassius Marcellus Clay Sr. 19121990 who had a sister and four brothers 5 6 and who himself was named in honor of the 19th-century Republican politician and staunch abolitionist Cassius Marcellus Clay also from the state of Kentucky. Clays fathers paternal grandparents were John Clay and Sallie Anne Clay; Clays sister Eva claimed that Sallie was a native of Madagascar . 7 He was a descendant of slaves of the antebellum South and was predominantly of African descent with Irish 8 and English family heritage. 9 10 His maternal great-grandfather Abe Grady emigrated from Ennis County Clare Ireland. 11 12 DNA testing performed in 2018 showed that through his paternal grandmother Clay was a descendant of the former slave Archer Alexander who had been chosen from the building crew as the model of a freed man for the Emancipation Memorial and was the subject of abolitionist William Greenleaf Eliot s book The Story of Archer Alexander: From Slavery to Freedom . 13 His father was a sign and billboard painter 4 and his mother Odessa OGrady Clay 19171994 was a domestic helper. Although Cassius Sr. was a Methodist he allowed Odessa to bring up both Cassius Jr. and his younger brother Rudolph Rudy Clay later renamed Rahaman Ali as Baptists . 14 Cassius Jr. attended Central High School in Louisville. He was dyslexic which led to difficulties in reading and writing at school and for much of his life. 15 He grew up amid racial segregation . His mother recalled one occasion when he was denied a drink of water at a store: They wouldnt give him one because of his color . That really affected him. 16 He was also strongly affected by the 1955 murder of Emmett Till which led to young Clay and a friend taking out their frustration by vandalizing a local rail yard. He once told his daughter Hana Nothing would ever shake me up more than the story of Emmett Till. 17 18 Amateur career Cassius Clay and his trainer Joe E. Martin January 1960 Clay defeated veteran Pole Zbigniew Pietrzykowski to win gold in the 1960 Summer Olympics . Clay was first directed toward boxing by Louisville police officer and boxing coach Joe E. Martin 19 who encountered the 12-year-old fuming over a thief having taken his bicycle. He told the officer he was going to whup the thief. The officer told Clay he had better learn how to box first. 20 Initially Clay did not take up Martins offer but after seeing amateur boxers on a local television boxing program called Tomorrows Champions Clay was interested in the prospect of fighting. 21 He then began to work with trainer Fred Stoner whom he credits with giving him the real training eventually molding my style my stamina and my system . For the last four years of Clays amateur career he was trained by boxing cutman Chuck Bodak . 22 Clay made his amateur boxing debut in 1954 against local amateur boxer Ronnie OKeefe. He won by split decision. 23 He went on to win six Kentucky Golden Gloves titles two national Golden Gloves titles an Amateur Athletic Union national title and the light heavyweight gold medal in the 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome. 24 Clays amateur record was 100 wins with five losses. In his 1975 autobiography he recalled that shortly after his return from the Rome Olympics he threw his gold medal into the Ohio River after he and a friend were refused service at a whites-only restaurant and fought with a white gang. The story was later disputed and several of his friends including Bundini Brown and photographer Howard Bingham denied it. Brown told Sports Illustrated writer Mark Kram Honkies sure bought into that one! Thomas Hauser s biography of Ali stated that Ali was refused service at the diner but that he lost his medal a year after he won it. 25 Ali received a replacement medal at the Georgia Dome during the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta where he lit the torch to start the Games. Professional career Main article: Boxing career of Muhammad Ali Early career On-site poster for Cassius Clays fifth professional bout Clay made his professional debut on October 29 1960 winning a six-round decision over Tunney Hunsaker . From then until the end of 1963 Clay amassed a record of 190 with 15 wins by knockout. He defeated boxers including Tony Esperti Jim Robinson Donnie Fleeman Alonzo Johnson George Logan Willi Besmanoff LaMar Clark Doug Jones and Henry Cooper . Clay also beat his former trainer and veteran boxer Archie Moore in a 1962 match. 26 27 These early fights were not without trials. Clay was knocked down by both Sonny Banks and Cooper. In the Cooper fight Clay was floored by a left hook at the end of round four and was saved by the bell going on to win in the predicted fifth round due to Coopers severely cut eye. The fight with Doug Jones on March 13 1963 was Clays toughest fight during this stretch. The number two and three heavyweight contenders respectively Clay and Jones fought on Jones home turf at New Yorks Madison Square Garden . Jones staggered Clay in the first round and the unanimous decision for Clay was greeted by boos and a rain of debris thrown into the ring. Watching on closed-circuit TV heavyweight champ Sonny Liston quipped that if he fought Clay he Liston might get locked up for murder. The fight was later named Fight of the Year by The Ring magazine. 28 In each of these fights Clay vocally belittled his opponents and vaunted his abilities. He called Jones an ugly little man and Cooper a bum . He said he was embarrassed to get in the ring with Alex Miteff and claimed that Madison Square Garden was too small for me . 29 Alis trash talk was inspired by professional wrestler Gorgeous George Wagner s after he saw Georges talking ability attract huge crowds to events. 30 In a 1969 interview he stated that he met with George in Las Vegas in 1961 that George told him that talking a big game would earn paying fans who either wanted to see him win or wanted to see him lose thus Clay transformed himself into a self-described big-mouth and a bragger . 31 In 1960 Clay left Moores camp partially due to Clays refusal to do chores such as washing dishes and sweeping. To replace Moore Clay hired Angelo Dundee to be his trainer. Clay had met Dundee in February 1957 during Clays amateur career. 32 Around this time Clay sought longtime idol Sugar Ray Robinson to be his manager but was rebuffed. 33 World heavyweight champion Fights against Liston Main article: Muhammad Ali vs. Sonny Liston By late 1963 Clay had become the top contender for Sonny Listons title. The fight was set for February 25 1964 in Miami Beach . Liston was an intimidating personality a dominating fighter with a criminal past and ties to the mob. Based on Clays uninspired performance against Jones and Cooper in his previous two fights and Listons destruction of former heavyweight champion Floyd Patterson in two first-round knockouts Clay was an 8:1 underdog. 34 Despite this Clay taunted Liston during the pre-fight buildup dubbing him the big ugly bear claiming Liston even smells like a bear and Im gonna give him to the local zoo after I whup him. 35 Clay turned the pre-fight weigh-in into a circus shouting at Liston that someone is going to die at ringside tonight. Clays pulse rate was measured at 120 more than double his normal 54. 34 Many of those in attendance thought Clays behavior stemmed from fear and some commentators wondered if he would show up for the bout. The outcome of the fight was a major upset. At the opening bell Liston rushed at Clay seemingly angry and looking for a quick knockout. However Clays superior speed and mobility enabled him to elude Liston making the champion miss and look awkward. At the end of the first round Clay opened up his attack and hit Liston repeatedly with jabs. Liston fought better in round two but at the beginning of the third round Clay hit Liston with a combination that buckled his knees and opened a cut under his left eye. This was the first time Liston had ever been cut. At the end of round four Clay was returning to his corner when he began experiencing blinding pain in his eyes and asked his trainer Angelo Dundee to cut off his gloves. Dundee refused. It has been speculated that the problem was due to ointment used to seal Listons cuts perhaps deliberately applied by his corner to his gloves. 34 Though unconfirmed boxing historian Bert Sugar said that two of Listons opponents also complained about their eyes burning . 36 Despite Listons attempts to knock out a blinded Clay Clay was able to survive the fifth round until sweat and tears rinsed the irritation from his eyes. In the sixth Clay dominated hitting Liston repeatedly. Liston did not answer the bell for the seventh round and Clay was declared the winner by TKO . Liston stated that the reason he quit was an injured shoulder. Following the win a triumphant Clay rushed to the edge of the ring and pointing to the ringside press shouted: Eat your words! He added I am the greatest! I shook up the world. Im the prettiest thing that ever lived. 37 At ringside post fight Clay appeared unconvinced that the fight was stopped due to a Liston shoulder injury saying that the only injury Liston had was an open eye a big cut eye! When told by Joe Louis that the injury was a left arm thrown out of its socket Clay quipped Yeah swinging at nothing who wouldnt? 38 In winning this fight at the age of 22 Clay became the youngest boxer to take the title from a reigning heavyweight champion. However Floyd Patterson remained the youngest to win the heavyweight championship doing so at the age 21 during an elimination bout following Rocky Marciano s retirement. Mike Tyson broke both records in 1986 when he defeated Trevor Berbick to win the heavyweight title at age 20. The feat also made Clay the fastest boxer to win the championship non-vacant in the modern era doing so in 20 bouts. Soon after the Liston fight Clay changed his name to Cassius X and then later to Muhammad Ali upon converting to the Nation of Islam . Ali then faced a rematch with Liston scheduled for May 1965 in Lewiston Maine . It had been scheduled for Boston the previous November but was postponed for six months due to Alis emergency surgery for a hernia three days before. 39 The fight was controversial. Midway through the first round Liston was knocked down by a difficult-to-see blow the press dubbed a phantom punch . Referee Jersey Joe Walcott did not begin the count immediately after the knockdown as Ali refused to retreat to a neutral corner. Liston rose after he had been down for about 20 seconds and the fight momentarily continued. However a few seconds later Walcott having been informed by the timekeepers that Liston had been down for a count of 10 stopped the match and declared Ali the winner by knockout. 40 The entire fight lasted less than two minutes. 41 It has since been speculated that Liston purposely dropped to the ground. Proposed motivations include threats on his life from the Nation of Islam that he had bet against himself and that he took a dive to pay off debts. Slow-motion replays show that Liston was jarred by a chopping right from Ali although it is unclear whether the blow was a genuine knockout punch. 42 Fight against Patterson Main article: Muhammad Ali vs. Floyd Patterson Ali defended his title against former heavyweight champion Floyd Patterson on November 22 1965. Before the match Ali mocked Patterson who was widely known to call him by his former name Cassius Clay as an Uncle Tom calling him The Rabbit . Although Ali had the better of Patterson who appeared injured during the fight the match lasted 12 rounds before being called on a technical knockout. Patterson later said he had strained his sacroiliac . Ali was criticized in the sports media for appearing to have toyed with Patterson during the fight. 43 Patterson biographer W. K. Stratton claims that the conflict between Ali and Patterson was not genuine but was staged to increase ticket sales and the closed-circuit viewing audience with both men complicit in the theatrics. Stratton also cites an interview by Howard Cosell in which Ali explained that rather than toying with Patterson he refrained from knocking him out after it became apparent Patterson was injured. Patterson later said that he had never been hit by punches as soft as Alis. Stratton states that Ali arranged the second fight in 1972 with the financially struggling Patterson to help the former champion earn enough money to pay a debt to the IRS . 43 Main Bout Ali watches replay of his March 1966 title fight against Henry Cooper . 44 After the Patterson fight Ali founded his own promotion company Main Bout. The company mainly handled Alis boxing promotions and pay-per-view closed-circuit television broadcasts. The companys stockholders were mainly fellow Nation of Islam members along with several others including Bob Arum . 45 Ali and then- WBA heavyweight champion boxer Ernie Terrell had agreed to meet for a bout in Chicago on March 29 1966 the WBA one of two boxing associations had stripped Ali of his title following his joining the Nation of Islam. But in February Ali was reclassified by the Louisville draft board as 1-A from 1-Y and he indicated that he would refuse to serve commenting to the press I aint got nothing against no Viet Cong ; no Viet Cong never called me nigger . 46 although the second part is probably apocryphal. 47 Amidst the media and public outcry over Alis stance the Illinois Athletic Commission refused to sanction the fight citing technicalities. 48 Instead Ali traveled to Canada and Europe and won championship bouts against George Chuvalo Henry Cooper Brian London and Karl Mildenberger . Ali returned to the United States to fight Cleveland Williams at the Astrodome in Houston on November 14 1966. The bout drew a record-breaking indoor crowd of 35 460 people. Williams had once been considered among the hardest punchers in the heavyweight division but in 1964 he had been shot at point-blank range by a Texas policeman resulting in the loss of one kidney and 3.0 metres 10 ft of his small intestine. Ali dominated Williams winning a third-round technical knockout in what some consider the finest performance of his career. Ali fought Terrell in Houston on February 6 1967. Terrell who was unbeaten in five years and had defeated many of the boxers Ali had faced was billed as Alis toughest opponent since Liston; he was big strong and had a three-inch reach advantage over Ali. During the lead up to the bout Terrell repeatedly called Ali Clay much to Alis annoyance. The two almost came to blows over the name issue in a pre-fight interview with Howard Cosell. Ali seemed intent on humiliating Terrell. I want to torture him he said. A clean knockout is too good for him. 49 The fight was close until the seventh round when Ali bloodied Terrell and almost knocked him out. In the eighth round Ali taunted Terrell hitting him with jabs and shouting between punches Whats my name Uncle Tom ... whats my name? Ali won a unanimous 15-round decision. Terrell claimed that early in the fight Ali deliberately thumbed him in the eye forcing him to fight half-blind and then in a clinch rubbed the wounded eye against the ropes. Because of Alis apparent intent to prolong the fight to inflict maximum punishment critics described the bout as one of the ugliest boxing fights . Tex Maule later wrote: It was a wonderful demonstration of boxing skill and a barbarous display of cruelty. Ali denied the accusations of cruelty but for Alis critics the fight provided more evidence of his arrogance. After Alis title defense against Zora Folley on March 22 he was stripped of his title due to his refusal to be drafted to army service. 4 His boxing license was also suspended by the state of New York. He was convicted of draft evasion on June 20 and sentenced to five years in prison and a 10 000 fine. He paid a bond and remained free while the verdict was being appealed. Draft resistance See also: Clay v. United States My enemy is the white people not Viet Cong or Chinese or Japanese. You my opposer when I want freedom. You my opposer when I want justice. You my opposer when I want equality. You wont even stand up for me in America for my religious beliefsand you want me to go somewhere and fight but you wont even stand up for me here at home? Muhammad Ali to a crowd of college students during his exile from boxing 50 Ali registered for conscription in the United States military on his 18th birthday and was listed as 1-A in 1962. 51 In 1964 he was reclassified as Class 1-Y fit for service only in times of national emergency after he failed the U.S. Armed Forces qualifying test because his writing and spelling skills were sub-standard 52 due to his dyslexia . 15 He was quoted as saying I said I was the greatest not the smartest! 51 53 By early 1966 the army lowered its standards to permit soldiers above the 15th percentile and Ali was again classified as 1-A. 4 51 53 This classification meant he was now eligible for the draft and induction into the U.S. Army at a time when the U.S. was involved in the Vietnam War a war which put him further at odds with the white establishment. 54 When notified of this status Ali declared that he would refuse to serve in the army and publicly considered himself a conscientious objector . 4 Ali stated: War is against the teachings of the Quran . Im not trying to dodge the draft. We are not supposed to take part in no wars unless declared by Allah or The Messenger. We dont take part in Christian wars or wars of any unbelievers . 55 He also said We are not to be the aggressor but we will defend ourselves if attacked. He stated: Man I aint got no quarrel with them Vietcong. 56 Ali elaborated: Why should they ask me to put on a uniform and go ten thousand miles from home and drop bombs and bullets on brown people in Vietnam while so-called Negro people in Louisville are treated like dogs and denied simple human rights? 57 Ali antagonized the white establishment in 1966 by refusing to be drafted into the U.S. military citing his religious beliefs and opposition to American involvement in the Vietnam War . 16 54 58 59 60 On April 28 1967 Ali appeared in Houston for his scheduled induction into the U.S. Armed Forces but he refused three times to step forward when his name was called. An officer warned him that he was committing a felony punishable by five years in prison and a fine of 10 000. Once more Ali refused to budge when his name was called and he was arrested. Later that same day the New York State Athletic Commission suspended his boxing license and the World Boxing Association stripped him of his title. 61 Other boxing commissions followed suit. Ali remained unable to obtain a license to box in any state for over three years. 62 page needed On June 4 1967 in a first for sports professionals a group of high-profile African-American athletes including Jim Brown Bill Russell and Kareem Abdul-Jabbar as well as one political leader Carl Stokes assembled with Ali at the Negro Industrial Economic Union in Cleveland for what became known as the Cleveland Summit or the Muhammad Ali Summit . The meeting was organized by Brown for his peers to question Ali about the seriousness of his convictions and to decide whether to support him which they ultimately did. 63 External videos Conversation with Muhammad Ali includes transcript July 7 1968 28:55 American Archive of Public Broadcasting 64 At the trial on June 20 1967 the jury found Ali guilty after only 21 minutes of deliberation of the criminal offense of violating the Selective Service laws by refusing to be drafted. 4 After a Court of Appeals upheld the conviction the case was reviewed by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1971. 65 Ali remained free in the years between the Appellate Court decision and the Supreme Court ruling. As public opinion began turning against the war and the Civil Rights Movement continued to gather momentum Ali became a popular speaker at colleges and universities across the country; this itinerary was rare if not unprecedented for a prizefighter. At Howard University for example he gave his popular Black Is Best speech to 4 000 cheering students and community intellectuals after he was invited to speak by sociology professor Nathan Hare on behalf of the Black Power Committee a student protest group. 66 On June 28 1971 the Supreme Court of the United States in Clay v. United States overturned Alis conviction by a unanimous 80 decision Justice Thurgood Marshall recused himself as he had been the U.S. Solicitor General at the time of Alis conviction. 67 The decision was not based on nor did it address the merits of Alis claims per se. Rather the Court held that since the appeal board gave no reason for the denial of a conscientious objector exemption to Ali that it was therefore impossible to determine which of the three basic tests for conscientious objector status offered in the Justice Department s brief the appeal board relied on and Alis conviction must be reversed. 68 In a 1974 interview Ali said If they say stand and salute the flag I do that out of respect because Im in the country . 69 Ali would later say If America was in trouble and real war came Id be on the front line if we had been attacked. But I could see that the Vietnam War wasnt right. 70 He also said Black men would go over there and fight but when they came home they couldnt even be served a hamburger. 71 Impact of Alis draft refusal Alis example inspired many black Americans and others. However initially when he refused induction he became arguably the most hated man in the country and received many death threats. People who supported Ali during this time were also threatened including sports journalist Jerry Izenberg whose columns defended Alis decision not to serve. He wrote Bomb threats emptied our office making the staff stand out in the snow. My car windshield was smashed with a sledgehammer. 72 73 The New York Times columnist William Rhoden wrote Alis actions changed my standard of what constituted an athletes greatness. Possessing a killer jump shot or the ability to stop on a dime was no longer enough. What were you doing for the liberation of your people? What were you doing to help your country live up to the covenant of its founding principles? 59 Recalling Alis anti-war position Kareem Abdul-Jabbar said: I remember the teachers at my high school didnt like Ali because he was so anti-establishment and he kind of thumbed his nose at authority and got away with it. The fact that he was proud to be a black man and that he had so much talent ... made some people think that he was dangerous. But for those very reasons I enjoyed him. 74 Civil rights figures came to believe that Ali had an energizing effect on the freedom movement as a whole. Al Sharpton spoke of his bravery at a time when there was still widespread support for the Vietnam War: For the heavyweight champion of the world who had achieved the highest level of athletic celebrity to put all of that on the linethe money the ability to get endorsementsto sacrifice all of that for a cause gave a whole sense of legitimacy to the movement and the causes with young people that nothing else could have done. Even those who were assassinated certainly lost their lives but they didnt voluntarily do that. He knew he was going to jail and did it anyway. Thats another level of leadership and sacrifice. 75 Ali was honored with the annual Martin Luther King Award in 1970 by civil rights leader Ralph Abernathy who called him a living example of soul power the March on Washington in two fists . Coretta Scott King added that Ali was a champion of justice and peace and unity . 76 In speaking of the cost on Alis career of his refusal to be drafted his trainer Angelo Dundee said One thing must be taken into account when talking about Ali: He was robbed of his best years his prime years. 77 Alis promoter Bob Arum did not support Alis choice at the time but in 2016 Arum stated: when I look back at his life and I was blessed to call him a friend and spent a lot of time with him its hard for me to talk about his exploits in boxing because as great as they were they paled in comparison to the impact that he had on the world. ... He did what he thought was right. And it turned out he was right and I was wrong. 78 Alis resistance to the draft was covered in the 2013 documentary The Trials of Muhammad Ali . 79 NSA and FBI monitoring of Alis communications In a secret operation code-named Minaret the National Security Agency NSA intercepted the communications of leading Americans including Ali Senators Frank Church and Howard Baker Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. prominent U.S. journalists and others who criticized the U.S. war in Vietnam. 80 81 A review by the NSA of the Minaret program concluded that it was disreputable if not outright illegal . 81 In 1971 Alis Fight of the Century with Frazier was used by an activist group the Citizens Commission to Investigate the FBI to pull off a burglary at an FBI office in Pennsylvania; the anticipation for the fight was unlike anything else so they believed the security would also be focused on the fight. This raid exposed the COINTELPRO operations that included illegal spying on activists involved with the civil rights and anti-war movements. One of the COINTELPRO targets was Ali and their activities included the FBI gaining access to his records as far back as elementary school; one such record mentioned him loving art as a child. 82 Exile and comeback In March 1966 Ali refused to be inducted into the armed forces . He was systematically denied a boxing license in every state and stripped of his passport. As a result he did not fight from March 1967 to October 1970from ages 25 to almost 29as his case worked its way through the appeals process before his conviction was overturned in 1971. 83 Protesting while exiled During this time of inactivity as opposition to the Vietnam War began to grow and Alis stance gained sympathy he spoke at colleges across the nation criticizing the Vietnam War and advocating African American pride and racial justice. Ali based himself in Chicago. 84 According to most close to him his Chicago years were formative. At the time Ali was widely condemned by the American media 85 with fears that his actions could potentially lead to mass civil disobedience . 86 Despite this Ebony magazine noted in the late 1960s that Alis popularity had increased during this time especially among black people. 87 The Super Fight Main article: The Super Fight While banned from sanctioned bouts Ali settled a 1 million lawsuit against radio producer Murray Woroner by accepting 10 000 to appear in a privately staged fantasy fight against retired champion Rocky Marciano. 88 In 1969 the boxers were filmed sparring for about 75 one-minute rounds; they produced several potential outcomes. 89 A computer program purportedly determined the winner based on data about the fighters along with the opinions of approximately 250 boxing experts. Edited versions of the bout were shown in movie theaters in 1970. In the U.S. version Ali lost in a simulated 13th-round knockout but in the European version Marciano lost due to cuts also simulated. 90 Ali suggested that prejudice determined his defeat in the U.S. version; he was reported to have jokingly said That computer was made in Alabama . 88 Return Muhammad Ali c. 1975 photo by Bernard Gotfryd On August 11 1970 with his case still in appeal Ali was granted a license to box by the City of Atlanta Athletic Commission. Leroy Johnson Jesse Hill Jr. and Harry Pett had used their local political influence and set up the company House of Sports to organize the fight underlining the influential power of Georgias black politics in Alis comeback. 91 Alis first return bout was against Jerry Quarry on October 26 resulting in a win after three rounds after Quarry was cut. A month earlier a victory in federal court forced the New York State Boxing Commission to reinstate Alis license. 92 He fought Oscar Bonavena at Madison Square Garden in December an uninspired performance that ended in a dramatic technical knockout of Bonavena in the 15th round. The win left Ali as a top contender against heavyweight champion Joe Frazier . 93 94 95 Fight against Joe Frazier Main article: Joe Frazier vs. Muhammad Ali Ali and Fraziers first fight held at the Garden on March 8 1971 was nicknamed the Fight of the Century due to the tremendous excitement surrounding a bout between two undefeated fighters each with a legitimate claim to be heavyweight champion. Veteran US boxing writer John Condon called it the greatest event Ive ever worked on in my life . The bout was broadcast to 36 countries; promoters granted 760 press passes. 25 Adding to the atmosphere were the considerable pre-fight theatrics and name calling. Before the fight Frazier called Ali Cassius Clay this angered Ali and he portrayed Frazier as a dumb tool of the white establishment . Frazier is too ugly to be champ Ali said. Frazier is too dumb to be champ. Ali also frequently called Frazier an Uncle Tom . Dave Wolf who worked in Fraziers camp recalled that Ali was saying the only people rooting for Joe Frazier are white people in suits Alabama sheriffs and members of the Ku Klux Klan . Im fighting for the little man in the ghetto. Joe was sitting there smashing his fist into the palm of his hand saying What the fuck does he know about the ghetto? 25 Ali began training at a farm near Reading Pennsylvania in 1971 and finding the country setting to his liking sought to develop a real training camp in the countryside. He found a five-acre site on a Pennsylvania country road in the village of Deer Lake Pennsylvania . On this site Ali carved out what was to become his training camp where he trained for all his fights from 1972 to the end of his career in 1981. The Monday night fight lived up to its billing. In a preview of their two other fights a crouching bobbing and weaving Frazier constantly pressured Ali getting hit regularly by Ali jabs and combinations but relentlessly attacking and scoring repeatedly especially to Alis body. The fight was even in the early rounds but Ali was taking more punishment than ever in his career up until that point. On several occasions in the early rounds he played to the crowd and shook his head no after he was hit. In the later roundsin what was the first appearance of the rope-a-dope strategy Ali leaned against the ropes and absorbed punishment from Frazier hoping to tire him. In the 11th round Frazier connected with a left hook that wobbled Ali but because it appeared that Ali might be clowning as he staggered backwards across the ring Frazier hesitated to press his advantage fearing an Ali counterattack. In the final round Frazier knocked Ali down with a vicious left hook which referee Arthur Mercante said was as hard as a man can be hit. Ali was back on his feet in three seconds. 25 Nevertheless Ali lost by unanimous decision his first professional defeat. After his loss Chamberlain challenge and Ellis fight Main article: Muhammad Ali vs. Jimmy Ellis In 1971 basketball star Wilt Chamberlain challenged Ali to a fight and a bout was scheduled for July 26. Although the seven-foot-two-inch-tall Chamberlain had formidable physical advantages over Aliweighing 60 pounds more and able to reach 14 inches furtherAli was able to influence Chamberlain into calling off the bout by taunting him with calls of Timber! and The tree will fall during a shared interview. These statements of confidence unsettled his taller opponent whom Los Angeles Lakers owner Jack Kent Cooke had offered a record-setting contract conditional on Chamberlain agreeing to abandon what Cooke termed this boxing foolishness 96 and he did exactly that. 97 To replace Alis opponent promoter Bob Arum quickly booked a former sparring partner of Alis Jimmy Ellis who was a childhood friend from Louisville Kentucky to fight him. Ali won the bout through a technical knockout when the referee stopped the fight in the twelfth round. 98 Fights against Quarry Patterson Foster Bugner and Norton After the loss to Frazier Ali fought Jerry Quarry had a second bout with Floyd Patterson and faced Bob Foster in 1972 winning a total of six fights that year. During two bouts he had in 1973 with Joe Bugner and Ken Norton he wore a Peoples Choice robe which was given to him by Elvis Presley . 99 In 1973 before his fight with Norton Tom Cushman said Ali was gloriously overconfident. He didnt consider this guy a threat at all. 100 But during the fight either in the 2nd round according to most press reports or the final round according to Norton 100 Norton broke Alis jaw and inflicted by decision the second loss of his career. After considering retirement Ali won a controversial decision against Norton in their second bout. This led to a rematch with Joe Frazier at Madison Square Garden on January 28 1974; Frazier had recently lost his title to George Foreman. Second fight against Joe Frazier Main article: Muhammad Ali vs. Joe Frazier II Ali vs. Frazier promotional photo Ali was strong in the early rounds of the fight and staggered Frazier in the second round. Referee Tony Perez mistakenly thought he heard the bell ending the round and stepped between the two fighters as Ali was pressing his attack giving Frazier time to recover. However Frazier came on in the middle rounds snapping Alis head in round seven and driving him to the ropes at the end of round eight. The last four rounds saw round-to-round shifts in momentum between the two fighters. Throughout most of the bout however Ali was able to circle away from Fraziers dangerous left hook and to tie Frazier up when he was cornered the latter a tactic that Fraziers camp complained of bitterly. Judges awarded Ali a unanimous decision. World heavyweight champion second reign The Rumble in the Jungle Main article: The Rumble in the Jungle The defeat of Frazier set the stage for a title fight against heavyweight champion George Foreman in Kinshasa Zaire on October 30 1974a bout nicknamed The Rumble in the Jungle . Foreman was considered one of the hardest punchers in heavyweight history. In assessing the fight analysts pointed out that Joe Frazier and Ken Norton who had given Ali four tough battles and won two of them had both been devastated by Foreman in second-round knockouts. Ali was 32 years old and had lost speed and reflexes since his twenties. Contrary to his later persona Foreman was at the time a brooding and intimidating presence. Almost no one associated with the sport not even Alis long-time supporter Howard Cosell gave the former champion a chance of winning. As usual Ali was confident and colorful before the fight. He told interviewer David Frost If you think the world was surprised when Nixon resigned wait till I whup Foremans behind! 101 He told the press Ive done something new for this fight. I done wrestled with an alligator I done tussled with a whale; handcuffed lightning thrown thunder in jail; only last week I murdered a rock injured a stone hospitalized a brick; Im so mean I make medicine sick. 102 Ali was wildly popular in Zaire with crowds chanting Ali bomaye Ali kill him wherever he went. Ali opened the fight moving and scoring with right crosses to Foremans head. Then beginning in the second round and to the consternation of his corner Ali retreated to the ropes and invited Foreman to hit him while covering up clinching and counterpunching all while verbally taunting Foreman. The move which would later become known as the Rope-a-dope so violated conventional boxing wisdomletting one of the hardest hitters in boxing strike at willthat at ringside writer George Plimpton thought the fight had to be fixed. 25 Foreman increasingly angered threw punches that were deflected and did not land squarely. Midway through the fight as Foreman began tiring Ali countered more frequently and effectively with punches and flurries which electrified the pro-Ali crowd. In the eighth round Ali dropped an exhausted Foreman with a combination at center ring; Foreman failed to make the count. Against the odds and amidst pandemonium in the ring Ali had regained the title by knockout. Reflecting on the fight George Foreman later said: I thought Ali was just one more knockout victim until about the seventh round I hit him hard to the jaw and he held me and whispered in my ear: That all you got George? I realized that this aint what I thought it was. 103 President Jimmy Carter greets Ali along with his wife Veronica Porche at a White House dinner 1977. It was a major upset victory 104 after Ali came in as a 41 underdog against the previously unbeaten heavy-hitting Foreman. 105 The fight became famous for Alis introduction of the rope-a-dope tactic. 106 The fight was watched by a record estimated television audience of 1 billion viewers worldwide. 107 108 It was the worlds most-watched live television broadcast at the time. 109 Fights against Wepner Lyle and Bugner Alis next opponents included Chuck Wepner Ron Lyle and Joe Bugner . Wepner a journeyman known as The Bayonne Bleeder stunned Ali with a knockdown in the ninth round; Ali would later say he tripped on Wepners foot. The fight inspired Sylvester Stallone to create the acclaimed film Rocky . 110 Third fight against Joe Frazier Main article: Thrilla in Manila Ali then agreed to a third match with Joe Frazier in Manila . The bout known as the Thrilla in Manila was held on October 1 1975 4 in temperatures approaching 100 F 38 C. In the first rounds Ali was aggressive moving and exchanging blows with Frazier. However Ali soon appeared to tire and adopted the rope-a-dope strategy frequently resorting to clinches. During this part of the bout Ali did some effective counterpunching but for the most part absorbed punishment from a relentlessly attacking Frazier. In the 12th round Frazier began to tire and Ali scored several sharp blows that closed Fraziers left eye and opened a cut over his right eye. With Fraziers vision now diminished Ali dominated the 13th and 14th rounds at times conducting what boxing historian Mike Silver called target practice on Fraziers head. The fight was stopped when Fraziers trainer Eddie Futch refused to allow Frazier to answer the bell for the 15th and final round despite Fraziers protests. Fraziers eyes were both swollen shut. Ali in his corner winner by TKO slumped on his stool spent. An ailing Ali said afterwards that the fight was the closest thing to dying that I know and when later asked if he had viewed the fight on videotape reportedly said Why would I want to go back and see Hell? After the fight he cited Frazier as the greatest fighter of all times next to me . After the third fight with Frazier Ali considered retirement. He said Im sore all over. My arms my face my sides all ache. Im so so tired. There is a great possibility that I will retire. You might have seen the last of me. I want to sit back and count my money live in my house and my farm work for my people and concentrate on my family. 111 Later career Ali being interviewed by WBAL-TV s Curt Anderson in Baltimore 1978 On February 2 1976 Ali defeated Jean-Pierre Coopman by 5th round knockout. The WBC Heavyweight title was not on the line for this fight. On April 30 1976 Ali would fight Jimmy Young and win a controversial unanimous decision. Howard Cosell would remark that he had never seen Ali so off in his timing and when asked on his performance against Young in the post-fight interview Ali stated that he was getting old and that he was preserving his energy for Ken Norton. 112 On May 24 1976 Ali defeated Richard Dunn winning by 5th round technical knockout. The punch used to knock Dunn out was taught to Ali by Taekwondo Grandmaster Jhoon Rhee . Rhee called that punch the Accupunch ; he learned it from Bruce Lee . 113 The Dunn fight was the last time Ali would knock an opponent out in his boxing career. Ali fought Ken Norton for the third time in September 1976. The bout which was held at Yankee Stadium resulted in Ali winning a controversial decision that ringside commentators had scored in favor of Norton. Afterwards he announced he was retiring from boxing to practice his faith having converted to Sunni Islam after falling out with the Nation of Islam the previous year. 114 After returning to beat Alfredo Evangelista in May 1977 Ali struggled in his next fight against Earnie Shavers that September getting pummeled a few times by punches to the head. Ali won the fight by another unanimous decision but the bout caused his longtime doctor Ferdie Pacheco to quit after he was rebuffed for telling Ali he should retire. Pacheco was quoted as saying the New York State Athletic Commission gave me a report that showed Alis kidneys were falling apart. I wrote to Angelo Dundee Alis trainer his wife and Ali himself. I got nothing back in response. Thats when I decided enough is enough. 25 In February 1978 Ali faced Leon Spinks at the Hilton Hotel in Las Vegas . At the time Spinks had only seven professional fights to his credit and had recently fought a draw with journeyman Scott LeDoux. Ali sparred less than two dozen rounds in preparation for the fight and was seriously out of shape by the opening bell. He lost the title by split decision. A rematch occurred in September at the Superdome in New Orleans Louisiana. 70 000 people attended the bout and paid a total of 6 million admission making it the largest live gate in boxing history at that time. 115 Ali won a unanimous decision in an uninspiring fight with referee Lucien Joubert scoring rounds 104 judge Ernie Cojoe 104 and judge Herman Preis 114. This made Ali the first heavyweight champion to win the belt three times. 116 117 Following this win on July 27 1979 Ali announced his retirement from boxing. His retirement was short-lived however; Ali announced his comeback to face Larry Holmes for the WBC belt in an attempt to win the heavyweight championship an unprecedented fourth time. The fight was largely motivated by Alis need for money. Boxing writer Richie Giachetti said Larry didnt want to fight Ali. He knew Ali had nothing left; he knew it would be a horror. It was around this time that Ali started struggling with vocal stutters and trembling hands. 118 The Nevada Athletic Commission NAC ordered that he undergo a complete physical in Las Vegas before being allowed to fight again. Ali chose instead to check into the Mayo Clinic who declared him fit to fight. Their opinion was accepted by the NAC on July 31 1980 paving the way for Alis return to the ring. 119 Fight stoppage vs. Larry Holmes Main article: Larry Holmes vs. Muhammad Ali On October 2 1980 Ali returned to the ring to fight Holmes at Caesars Palace in Las Vegas . Holmes who fought under the nickname The Easton Assassin easily dominated Ali. After the tenth round Angelo Dundee stepped into the ring and instructed the referee to stop the fight. It was the only time Ali ever lost by stoppage . Immediately after the fight Ali was given painkillers and antidepressants in violation of World Boxing Council rules prohibiting the administration of any drug before the postfight urinalysis. 120 121 Giachetti called the fight awful...the worst sports event I ever had to cover . Actor Sylvester Stallone was ringside for the fight and said that it was like watching an autopsy on a man who is still alive. 25 The Holmes fight is said to have contributed to Alis Parkinsons syndrome . 122 123 124 Despite pleas to definitively retire Ali fought one last time on December 11 1981 in Nassau Bahamas against Trevor Berbick losing a ten-round decision. 125 126 127 Exhibition bouts Ali boxed both well-known boxers and celebrities from other walks of life including Antonio Inoki 128 Michael Dokes 129 Sammy Davis Jr. 130 Richard Pryor 130 Marvin Gaye 130 Burt Young 130 Lyle Alzado 131 Dave Semenko 132 and Puerto Rican comedian Jose Miguel Agrelot with Iris Chacon acting as Agrelots corner-woman. 133 Ali vs Inoki Main article: Muhammad Ali vs. Antonio Inoki Muhammad Alis boxing robe at Antonio Inoki Exhibition On June 26 1976 Ali participated in an exhibition bout in Tokyo against Japanese professional wrestler and martial artist Antonio Inoki . 134 Ali was only able to land two jabs while Inokis kicks caused two blood clots and an infection that almost resulted in Alis leg being amputated as a result of Alis team insisting on rules restricting Inokis ability to wrestle. 134 Because of this the fight has been criticized for causing Ali trouble healthwise mostly in terms of movement later down the line; Ferdie Pacheco stated Ali was still feeling the effects of his leg injury and his mobility was not what it had been . 134 The match was not scripted and ultimately declared a draw. 134 After Alis death The New York Times declared it his least memorable fight. 135 Most boxing commentators at the time viewed the fight negatively and hoped it would be forgotten as some considered it a 15-round farce . 136 Today it is considered by some to be one of Alis most influential fights and CBS Sports said the attention the mixed-style bout received foretold the arrival of standardized MMA years later . 136 137 Ali and Inoki began a friendship after the fight. 138 Ali vs Alzado In 1979 Ali fought an exhibition match against NFL player Lyle Alzado . The fight went 8 rounds and was declared a draw. 139 Ali vs Semenko Ali fought NHL player Dave Semenko in an exhibition on June 12 1983. 140 The match was officially a draw after going three rounds but the Canadian Press reported Ali was not seriously trying for most of the bout instead just toying with Semenko. 141 Personal life Marriages and children Children of Muhammad Ali With Belinda Boyd Maryum born 1968 Jamillah born 1970 Rasheda born 1970 Muhammad Jr. born 1972 With Patricia Harvell Miya born 1972 With Wanda Bolton Khaliah born 1974 With Veronica Porche Hana born 1976 Laila born 1977 With Yolanda Williams Asaad adopted 1986 Ali was married four times and had seven daughters and two sons. Ali was introduced to cocktail waitress Sonji Roi by Herbert Muhammad who was to become Alis long-time manager and asked her to marry him after their first date. They married approximately one month later on August 14 1964. 142 They quarreled over Sonjis refusal to join the Nation of Islam. 143 According to Ali She wouldnt do what she was supposed to do. She wore lipstick; she went into bars; she dressed in clothes that were revealing and didnt look right. 144 The marriage was childless and they divorced on January 10 1966. Just before the divorce was finalized Ali sent Sonji a note: You traded heaven for hell baby. 145 Alis brother Rahaman said that she was Alis only true love and the Nation of Islam made Ali divorce her and Ali never got over it. 143 On August 17 1967 Ali married Belinda Boyd . In an interview with NBC 6 Boyd recounted meeting Ali when she was 10 years old at her hometown mosque. He said Listen here little girl. This is my name. Imma be famous. You need to keep that cause its gone be worth a lot of money Boyd said mimicking Ali. Youll never be famous with that name. And I walked away Boyd said. 146 Born into a Chicago family that had converted to the Nation Of Islam she later changed her name to Khalilah Ali though she was still called Belinda by old friends and family. They had four children: author and rapper Maryum 147 May May born 1968; twins Jamillah and Rasheda born 1970; and Muhammad Ali Jr. born 1972. 148 Rasheda married Robert Walsh and has two sons: Biaggio Ali born 1998 who is an amateur MMA fighter and Nico Ali born 2000 who is a professional boxer. 149 Ali was a resident of Cherry Hill New Jersey in suburban Philadelphia in the early 1970s. 150 At age 32 in 1974 Ali began an extramarital relationship with 16-year-old Wanda Bolton who subsequently changed her name to Aaisha Ali with whom he fathered another daughter Khaliah born June 1974. While still married to Belinda Ali married Aaisha a year later in an Islamic ceremony that was not legally recognized. According to Khaliah Aaisha and her mother lived at Alis Deer Lake training camp alongside Belinda and her children. 151 In January 1985 Aaisha sued Ali for unpaid palimony. The case was settled when Ali agreed to set up a 200 000 trust fund for Khaliah. 152 In 2001 Khaliah was quoted as saying she believed her father viewed her as a mistake . 151 He had another daughter Miya born 1972 from an extramarital relationship with Patricia Harvell. 153 Muhammad Ali with wife Veronica Porche at a fundraiser in Baltimore 1977 By the summer of 1977 his second marriage ended due to Alis repeated infidelity and he had married actress and model Veronica Porche. 154 At the time of their marriage they had a daughter Hana and Veronica was pregnant with their second child. Their second daughter Laila Ali was born in December 1977 and went on to become a professional boxer. 155 By 1986 Ali and Porche were divorced due to Alis continuous infidelity. Porche said of Alis infidelity It was too much temptation for him with women who threw themselves at him. It didnt mean anything. He didnt have affairs he had one-night stands. I knew beyond a doubt there were no feelings involved. It was so obvious It was easy to forgive him. 156 On November 19 1986 Ali married Yolanda Lonnie Williams. Lonnie first met Ali at the age of 6 when her family moved to Louisville in 1963. 157 In 1982 she became Alis primary caregiver and in return he paid for her to attend graduate school at UCLA . 157 Together they adopted a son Asaad Amin born 1986 when Asaad was five months old. 158 In 1992 Lonnie incorporated Greatest of All Time Inc. G.O.A.T. Inc to consolidate and license his intellectual properties for commercial purposes. She served as the vice president and treasurer until the sale of the company in 2006. 157 Ali with wife Lonnie in Washington D.C. 2001 Ali then lived in Scottsdale Arizona with Lonnie. 159 In January 2007 it was reported that they had put their home in Berrien Springs Michigan which they had bought in 1975 160 up for sale and had purchased a home in eastern Jefferson County Kentucky for 1 875 000. 161 Both homes were subsequently sold after Alis death with Lonnie living in their remaining home in Paradise Valley Arizona. Lonnie converted to Islam from Catholicism in her late twenties. 162 Alis daughter Laila was a professional boxer from 1999 until 2007 163 despite her fathers previous opposition to womens boxing. In 1978 he said Women are not made to be hit in the breast and face like that. 164 Ali still attended a number of his daughters fights and later admitted to Laila he was wrong. 165 Alis daughter Hana is married to Bellator middleweight fighter Kevin Casey . Hana wrote about her father His love for people was extraordinary. I would get home from school to find homeless families sleeping in our guest room. Hed see them on the street pile them into his Rolls-Royce and bring them home. Hed buy them clothes take them to hotels and pay the bills for months in advance. She also said celebrities like Michael Jackson and Clint Eastwood would often visit Ali. 166 167 Paternity claims Kiiursti Mensah-Ali claims she is Alis biological daughter with Barbara Mensah with whom he allegedly had a 20-year relationship 168 169 170 171 citing photographs and a paternity test conducted in 1988. She said he accepted responsibility and took care of her but all contacts with him were cut off after he married his fourth wife Lonnie. Kiiursti says she has a relationship with his other children. After his death she again made passionate appeals to be allowed to mourn at his funeral. 172 173 174 In 2010 Osmon Williams came forward claiming to be Alis biological son. 175 His mother Temica Williams also known as Rebecca Holloway launched a 3 million lawsuit against Ali in 1981 for sexual assault claiming that she had started a sexual relationship with him when she was 12 and that her son Osmon born 1977 was fathered by Ali when she was 17. 176 She further alleged that Ali had originally supported her and her son financially but stopped doing so after four years. The case went on until 1986 and was eventually thrown out as her allegations were deemed to be barred by the statute of limitations . 177 According to Veronica Ali admitted to the affair with Williams but did not believe Osmon was his son which Veronica supported by saying Everybody in the camp was going with that girl. 178 179 Alis biographer and friend Thomas Hauser has said this claim was of questionable veracity . 180 Religion and beliefs Main article: Religious views of Muhammad Ali Affiliation with the Nation of Islam Ali said that he first heard of the Nation of Islam when he was fighting in the Golden Gloves tournament in Chicago in 1959 and attended his first Nation of Islam meeting in 1961. He continued to attend meetings although keeping his involvement hidden from the public. In 1962 Clay met Malcolm X who soon became his spiritual and political mentor. 181 By the time of the first Liston fight Nation of Islam members including Malcolm X were visible in his entourage. This led to a story in The Miami Herald just before the fight disclosing that Clay had joined the Nation of Islam which nearly caused the bout to be canceled. The article quoted Cassius Clay Sr. as saying that his son had joined the Black Muslims when he was 18. 182 Ali seen in background at an address by Elijah Muhammad in 1964 In fact Clay was initially refused entry to the Nation of Islam often called the Black Muslims at the time due to his boxing career. However after he won the championship from Liston in 1964 the Nation of Islam was more receptive and agreed to publicize his membership. 181 Shortly afterwards on March 6 Elijah Muhammad gave a radio address that Clay would be renamed Muhammad one who is worthy of praise Ali most high. 183 Around that time Ali moved to the south side of Chicago and lived in a series of houses always near the Nation of Islams Mosque Maryam or Elijah Muhammads residence. He stayed in Chicago for about 12 years. 184 Only a few journalists most notably Howard Cosell accepted the new name at that time. Ali stated that his earlier name was a slave name and a white mans name and added that I didnt choose it and I dont want it. I am Muhammad Ali a free name . 185 The person he was formerly named after was a white slave owner turned abolitionist . 186 Ali explained in his autobiography after studying his works he may have gotten rid of his slaves but he held on to white supremacy. 187 Ali concluded: Why should I keep my white slavemasters name visible and my black ancestors invisible unknown unhonored? 185 Not afraid to antagonize the white establishment Ali stated I am America. I am the part you wont recognize. But get used to me. Black confident cocky; my name not yours; my religion not yours; my goals my own; get used to me. 188 Alis friendship with Malcolm X ended as Malcolm split with the Nation of Islam a couple of weeks after Ali joined and Ali remained with the Nation of Islam. 189 190 Ali later said that turning his back on Malcolm was one of the mistakes he regretted most in his life. 191 Aligning himself with the Nation of Islam its leader Elijah Muhammad and a narrative that labeled the white race as the perpetrator of genocide against African Americans made Ali a target of public condemnation. The Nation of Islam was widely viewed by whites and some African Americans as a black separatist hate religion with a propensity toward violence; Ali had few qualms about using his influential voice to speak Nation of Islam doctrine. 192 In a press conference articulating his opposition to the Vietnam War Ali stated My enemy is the white people not Vietcong or Chinese or Japanese. 50 In relation to integration he said: We who follow the teachings of Elijah Muhammad dont want to be forced to integrate. Integration is wrong. We dont want to live with the white man; thats all. 193 194 better source needed Writer Jerry Izenberg once noted that the Nation became Alis family and Elijah Muhammad became his father. But there is an irony to the fact that while the Nation branded white people as devils Ali had more white colleagues than most African American people did at that time in America and continued to have them throughout his career. 25 Conversion to SunniSufi Islam In Hausers biography Muhammad Ali: His Life and Times Ali stated that he was not a Christian as he thought the idea of God having a son sounded wrong and did not make sense to him stating God dont beget; man begets . However he still believed that even good Christians or good Jews could receive Gods blessing and enter heaven as he stated God created all people no matter what their religion . He also stated If youre against someone because hes a Muslim thats wrong. If youre against someone because hes a Christian or a Jew thats wrong . 195 Ali attending a Saviours Day celebration in 1974 In a 2004 autobiography Ali attributed his conversion to mainstream Sunni Islam to Warith Deen Muhammad who assumed leadership of the Nation of Islam upon the death of his father Elijah Muhammad and persuaded the Nations followers to become adherents of Sunni Islam. He said some people did not like the change and stuck to Elijahs teachings but he admired it and so left Elijahs teachings and became a follower of Sunni Islam. 196 Ali had gone on the Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca in 1972 which inspired him in a similar manner to Malcolm X meeting people of different colors from all over the world giving him a different outlook and greater spiritual awareness. 197 In 1977 he said that after he retired he would dedicate the rest of his life to getting ready to meet God by helping people charitable causes uniting people and helping to make peace. 198 He went on another Hajj pilgrimage to Mecca in 1988. 199 After the September 11 attacks in 2001 he stated that Islam is a religion of peace and does not promote terrorism or killing people and that he was angry that the world sees a certain group of Islam followers who caused this destruction but they are not real Muslims. They are racist fanatics who call themselves Muslims. In December 2015 after the November 2015 Paris attacks he stated that True Muslims know that the ruthless violence of so-called Islamic jihadists goes against the very tenets of our religion that We as Muslims have to stand up to those who use Islam to advance their own personal agenda and that political leaders should use their position to bring understanding about the religion of Islam and clarify that these misguided murderers have perverted peoples views on what Islam really is. 200 He also developed an interest in Sufism which he referenced in his autobiography The Soul of a Butterfly . 191 201 202 According to Alis daughter Hana Yasmeen Ali who co-authored The Soul of a Butterfly with him Ali was attracted to Sufism after reading the books of Inayat Khan which contain Sufi teachings. 203 204 Muhammad Ali received guidance from Islamic scholars such as Grand Mufti of Syria Al Marhum Al Sheikh Ahmed Kuftaro Hisham Kabbani Imam Zaid Shakir Hamza Yusuf and Timothy J. Gianotti who was at Alis bedside during his last days and ensured that although his funeral was interfaith it was still in accordance with Islamic rites and rituals. 205 206 Health During his amateur career Ali refrained from smoking drugs and drinking alcohol and soda pop and adopted an idiosyncratic diet. 207 Upon his acceptance of the dietary restrictions of Islam the Nation of Islam recruited cooks to prepare his meals. 208 Entertainment career Further information: Muhammad Ali in media and popular culture Ali with clowns Charlie Frye and Skeeter Reece in 1980 Acting Ali had a cameo role in the 1962 film version of Requiem for a Heavyweight and during his exile from boxing he starred in the short-lived 1969 Broadway musical Buck White . 209 210 He also appeared in the documentary film Black Rodeo 1972 riding both a horse and a bull. 211 His autobiography The Greatest: My Own Story written with Richard Durham was published in 1975. 212 In 1977 the book was adapted into a film called The Greatest in which Ali played himself and Ernest Borgnine played Angelo Dundee . The film Freedom Road made in 1978 features Ali in a rare acting role as Gideon Jackson a former slave and Union American Civil War soldier in 1870s Virginia who gets elected to the U.S. Senate and battles alongside former slaves and white sharecroppers to keep the land they have tended all their lives. 213 Spoken word poetry Float like a butterfly sting like a bee. His hands cant hit what his eyes cant see. Now you see me now you dont. George thinks he will but I know he wont. Muhammad Ali 214 In 1963 Ali released an album of spoken word music on Columbia Records titled I Am the Greatest and in 1964 he recorded a cover version of the rhythm and blues song Stand by Me . 215 216 I Am the Greatest sold 500 000 copies and has been identified as an early example of rap music and a precursor to hip hop . 217 218 219 220 221 It reached number 61 on the album chart and was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Comedy Album at the 6th Annual Grammy Awards in 1964. 222 221 He later received a second Grammy nomination for Best Recording for Children with his 1976 spoken word novelty record The Adventures of Ali and His Gang vs. Mr. Tooth Decay . 221 Professional wrestling Ali was involved with professional wrestling at different times in his career. On June 1 1976 as Ali was preparing for his bout with Inoki he attended a match featuring Gorilla Monsoon . After the match was over Ali removed his shirt and jacket and confronted professional wrestler Gorilla Monsoon in the ring after his match at a World Wide Wrestling Federation show in Philadelphia Arena . After dodging a few punches Monsoon put Ali in an airplane spin and dumped him to the mat. Ali stumbled to the corner where his associate Butch Lewis convinced him to walk away. 223 Ali right as a special guest referee along with Pat Patterson middle at WrestleMania I with Liberace left as timekeeper On March 31 1985 Ali was the special guest referee for the main event of the inaugural WrestleMania event. 224 In 1995 Ali led a group of Japanese and American professional wrestlers including his 1976 opponent Antonio Inoki and Ric Flair on a sports diplomacy mission to North Korea . Ali was guest of honor at the record-breaking Collision in Korea a wrestling event with the largest attendance of all time. 138 Ali was inducted into the WWE Hall of Fame by The Undertaker at the 2024 ceremony . 225 226 Television appearances Further information: Boxing career of Muhammad Ali Television viewership Muhammad Alis fights were some of the worlds most-watched television broadcasts setting television viewership records. His most-watched fights drew an estimated 12 billion viewers worldwide between 1974 and 1980 and were the worlds most-watched live television broadcasts at the time. 109 Outside of fights he made many other television appearances. The following table lists known viewership figures of his non-fight television appearances. For television viewership figures of his fights see Boxing career of Muhammad Ali: Television viewership . Date Broadcast Regions Viewers Source October 17 1971 Parkinson series 1 episode 14 United Kingdom 12 000 000 citation needed January 25 1974 Parkinson series 3 episode 18 United Kingdom 12 000 000 citation needed December 7 1974 Parkinson United Kingdom 12 000 000 citation needed March 28 1977 49th Academy Awards United States 39 719 000 227 December 25 1978 This Is Your Life Muhammad Ali United States 60 000 000 228 October 24 1979 Diffrent Strokes Arnolds Hero United States 41 000 000 229 January 17 1981 Parkinson series 10 episode 32 United Kingdom 12 000 000 citation needed July 19 1996 Atlanta 1996 Summer Olympics opening ceremony Worldwide 3 500 000 000 230 United States 209 000 000 231 September 21 2001 America: A Tribute to Heroes United States 60 000 000 232 January 4 2007 Michael Parkinsons Greatest Entertainers United Kingdom 3 630 000 233 June 9 2016 Muhammad Ali memorial service Worldwide 1 000 000 000 234 Total viewership Worldwide 4 692 349 000 Art Ali was also an amateur artist and made dozens of drawings and paintings in the 1970s. In 1977 Rodney Hilton Brown who owned an art gallery in NYC asked Ali if he was interested in painting. Ali took him up on the offer and produced several paintings for him to sell. Brown is the author of Muhammad Ali: The Untold Story: Painter Poet and Prophet . 235 In October 2021 26 of his drawings and arts were placed on auction and sold for close to US1 Million. 236 237 Later life By the end of his boxing career Ali had absorbed an estimated 200 000 hits. 238 In 1984 Ali was diagnosed with Parkinsons syndrome which sometimes results from head trauma from violent physical activities such as boxing. 124 239 240 Ali still remained active during this time later participating as a guest referee at WrestleMania I . 241 242 Philanthropy humanitarianism and politics Ali was known for being a humanitarian 243 and philanthropist. 244 He focused on practicing his Islamic duty of charity and good deeds donating millions to charity organizations and disadvantaged people of all religious backgrounds. It is estimated that Ali helped to feed more than 22 million people afflicted by hunger across the world. 245 Early in his career one of his main focuses was youth education. He spoke at several historically black colleges and universities about the importance of education and became the largest single black donor to the United Negro College Fund in 1967 by way of a 10 000 donation 78 000 in 2020 USD. In late 1966 he also pledged to donate a total of 100 000 to the UNCF specifically promising to donate much of the proceeds of his title defense against Cleveland Williams and paid 4 500 per closed circuit installation at six HBCUs so they could watch his fights. 76 Ali began visiting Africa starting in 1964 when he visited Nigeria and Ghana . 246 In 1974 he visited a Palestinian refugee camp in Southern Lebanon where Ali declared support for the Palestinian struggle to liberate their homeland . 247 During that visit Ali also declared that the United States is the stronghold of Zionism and imperialism. 248 In 1978 following his loss to Spinks and before winning the rematch Ali visited Bangladesh and received honorary citizenship there. 249 250 251 The same year he participated in The Longest Walk a protest march in the United States in support of Native American rights along with singer Stevie Wonder and actor Marlon Brando . 252 In early 1980 Ali was recruited by President Jimmy Carter for a diplomatic mission to Africa in an effort to persuade a number of African governments to join the US-led boycott of the Moscow Olympics in protest of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan . Having arrived in Tanzania Ali told cameras Russia is invading a Muslim country Asiatic country and that its probable intention to head to oil -rich Persia to take wells and ports could lead to nuclear war . My purpose in coming here was to try to stop that. 253 However according to Ali biographer Thomas Hauser at best it was ill-conceived; at worst a diplomatic disaster. The Tanzanian government was insulted that Carter had sent an athlete to discuss a serious political issue. One official asked whether the United States would send Chris Evert to negotiate with London . Consequently Ali was only received by the youth and culture minister rather than President Julius Nyerere . Ali was unable to explain why the African countries should join the US boycott when it had failed to support the African boycott of the 1976 Olympics in protest of Apartheid in South Africa although neither did the Soviet Union and was unaware of the sentiment that the Soviet Union had backed some popular revolutions on the continent although none of the countries on the itinerary were Soviet allies. 254 255 The Nigerian government also rebuffed him and confirmed that they would be participating in the Moscow Games. Ali did however convince the government of Kenya to boycott the Soviet Olympics. 256 On January 19 1981 in Los Angeles Ali talked a suicidal man down from jumping off a ninth-floor ledge an event that made national news. 257 258 President Ronald Reagan with Ali in the Oval Office in 1983 In 1984 Ali announced his support for the re-election of United States President Ronald Reagan . When asked to elaborate on his endorsement of Reagan Ali told reporters Hes keeping God in schools and thats enough. 259 In 1985 he visited Israel to request the release of Muslim prisoners at Atlit detainee camp which Israel declined. 260 Around 1987 the California Bicentennial Foundation for the U.S. Constitution selected Ali to personify the vitality of the U.S. Constitution and Bill of Rights . Ali rode on a float at the following years Tournament of Roses Parade launching the U.S. Constitutions 200th birthday commemoration. 261 In 1988 during the First Intifada Ali participated in a Chicago rally in support of Palestine . 247 The same year he visited Sudan to raise awareness about the plight of famine victims. 262 According to Politico Ali supported Orrin Hatch politically. 263 In 1989 he participated in an Indian charity event with the Muslim Educational Society in Kozhikode Kerala along with Bollywood actor Dilip Kumar . 199 Ali in 1997 In 1990 Ali traveled to Iraq prior to the Gulf War and met with president Saddam Hussein in an attempt to negotiate the release of American hostages. Ali secured the release of the hostages in exchange for promising Hussein that he would bring America an honest account of Iraq. Despite arranging the hostages release he received criticism from president George H. W. Bush and Joseph C. Wilson the highest-ranking American diplomat in Baghdad. 264 265 In 1994 Ali campaigned to the United States government to come to the aid of refugees afflicted by the Rwandan genocide and to donate to organizations helping Rwandan refugees. 245 In 1996 he lit the flame at the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta Georgia. It was watched by an estimated 3.5 billion viewers worldwide. 230 After Ali met a lesbian couple who were fans of his in 1997 he smiled and said to friend and biographer Thomas Hauser They look like theyre happy together. Hauser wrote about the story The thought that Liz and Roz the lesbian couple he met were happy pleased Muhammad. Ali wanted people to be happy. 266 On November 17 2002 Ali went to Afghanistan as the U.N. Messenger of Peace . 267 He was in Kabul for a three-day goodwill mission as a special guest of the UN. 268 On September 1 2009 Ali visited Ennis County Clare Ireland the home of his great-grandfather Abe Grady who emigrated to the U.S. in the 1860s eventually settling in Kentucky. 269 On July 27 2012 Ali was a titular bearer of the Olympic flag during the opening ceremonies of the 2012 Summer Olympics in London. He was helped to his feet by his wife Lonnie to stand before the flag due to his Parkinsons syndrome rendering him unable to carry it into the stadium. 270 The same year he was awarded the Philadelphia Liberty Medal in recognition of his lifelong efforts in activism philanthropy and humanitarianism. 261 243 Earnings By 1978 Alis total fight purse earnings were estimated to be nearly 60 million 271 inflation-adjusted 379 million including an estimated 47.45 million grossed between 1970 and 1978. 272 By 1980 his total fight purse earnings were estimated to be up to 70 million 273 inflation-adjusted 338 million. In 1978 Ali revealed that he was broke and several news outlets reported his net worth to be an estimated 3.5 million 272 inflation-adjusted 16 million. The press attributed his decline in wealth to several factors including taxes consuming at least half of his income management taking a third of his income 272 his lifestyle and spending on family charity and religious causes. 273 In 2006 Ali sold his name and image for 50 million 274 after which Forbes estimated his net worth to be 55 million in 2006. 275 Following his death in 2016 his fortune was estimated to be between 50 million and 80 million. 276 Declining health Im blessed and thankful to God that I understand hes trying me. This is a trial from God. He gave me this illness to remind me that I am not number one; He is. Muhammad Ali reflecting on having Parkinsons disease 277 278 Alis Parkinsons syndrome led to a gradual decline in his health though he was still active into the early 2000s promoting his own biopic Ali in 2001. That year he also contributed an on-camera segment to the America: A Tribute to Heroes benefit concert. 279 Ali and Michael J. Fox testify before a Senate committee on providing government funding to combat Parkinsons. In 1998 Ali began working with actor Michael J. Fox who has Parkinsons disease to raise awareness and fund research for a cure. They made a joint appearance before Congress to push the case in 2002. In 2000 Ali worked with the Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinsons Research to raise awareness and encourage donations for research. 280 In February 2013 Alis brother Rahaman Ali said Muhammad could no longer speak and could be dead within days. 281 Alis daughter May May Ali responded to the rumors stating that she had talked to him on the phone the morning of February 3 and he was fine. 282 On December 20 2014 Ali was hospitalized for a mild case of pneumonia . 283 Ali was once again hospitalized on January 15 2015 for a urinary tract infection after being found unresponsive at a guest house in Scottsdale Arizona. 284 He was released the next day. 285 Death Ali was hospitalized in Scottsdale Arizona on June 2 2016 with a respiratory illness. Though his condition was initially described as fair it worsened and he died the following day at the age of 74 from septic shock . 286 287 288 289 News coverage and tributes Following Alis death he was the number-one trending topic on Twitter for over 12 hours and on Facebook for several days. BET played their documentary Muhammad Ali: Made In Miami . ESPN played four hours of non-stop commercial-free coverage of Ali. News networks such as ABC News BBC CNN and Fox News also covered him extensively. citation needed He was mourned globally and a family spokesman said the family certainly believes that Muhammad was a citizen of the world ... and they know that the world grieves with him . 290 Politicians such as Barack Obama Hillary Clinton Bill Clinton Donald Trump David Cameron and more paid tribute to Ali. Ali also received numerous tributes from the world of sports including Michael Jordan Tiger Woods Floyd Mayweather Mike Tyson the Miami Marlins LeBron James Steph Curry and more. Then-Louisville mayor Greg Fischer stated Muhammad Ali belongs to the world. But he only has one hometown. 290 The day after Alis death the UFC paid tribute to Ali at their UFC 199 event in a lengthy video tribute package crediting Ali for his accomplishments and inspiring multiple UFC champions. 291 Memorial External videos Muhammad Ali Memorial Service C-SPAN 292 Alis headstone with an inscription of his quote: Service to others is the rent you pay for your room in heaven Alis funeral had been pre-planned by himself and others for several years prior to his actual death. 293 The services began in Louisville on June 9 2016 with an Islamic Janazah prayer service at Freedom Hall on the grounds of the Kentucky Exposition Center . The Janazah prayer was attended by Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan . 294 On June 10 2016 the funeral procession passed through the streets of Louisville ending at Cave Hill Cemetery where his body was interred during a private ceremony. A public memorial service for Ali at downtown Louisvilles KFC Yum! Center was held during the afternoon of June 10. 295 296 297 Billy Crystal his wife Lonnie Ali sports journalist Bryant Gumbel and former President Bill Clinton all gave the eulogies. 298 The pallbearers included Will Smith Lennox Lewis and Mike Tyson with honorary pallbearers including George Chuvalo Larry Holmes and George Foreman . 299 Alis memorial was watched by an estimated 1 billion viewers worldwide. 234 If the measure of greatness is to gladden the heart of every human being on the face of the earth then he truly was the greatest. In every way he was the bravest the kindest and the most excellent of men. Tribute from Bob Dylan . 300 Legacy In boxing Ali remains the only three-time lineal heavyweight champion . He is the only boxer to be named The Ring magazine Fighter of the Year six times and was involved in more Ring Fight of the Year bouts than any other fighter. He was one of only three boxers to be named Sportsman of the Year by Sports Illustrated . He was also named BBC Overseas Sports Personality of the Year three times. 301 Ali was inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame in its first year 302 and held wins over seven other Hall of Fame inductees during an era that has been called the golden age of heavyweight boxing. citation needed His joint records of beating 21 boxers for the world heavyweight title and winning 14 unified title bouts stood for 35 years. note 1 note 2 303 304 better source needed In hip-hop Ive wrestled with alligators Ive tussled with a whale. I done handcuffed lightning and throw thunder in jail. You know Im bad. Just last week I murdered a rock injured a stone hospitalized a brick. Im so mean I make medicine sick. Muhammad Ali 305 Ali often used rhyme schemes and spoken word poetry when trash talking in boxing and also delivered political poetry in his activism outside of boxing. 306 307 308 He played a role in the shaping of the black poetic tradition paving the way for The Last Poets in 1968 Gil Scott-Heron in 1970 and the emergence of rap music in the 1970s. 219 Ali has been referred to as the first rapper . 309 As a rhyming trickster he was noted for his boasts funky delivery comical trash talk and endless quotables . 220 Rolling Stone notes his freestyle skills and his rhymes flow and braggadocio would one day become typical of old school MCs like Run DMC and LL Cool J and his outsized ego foreshadowed the vainglorious excesses of Kanye West while his Afrocentric consciousness and cutting honesty pointed forward to modern bards like Rakim Nas Jay-Z and Kendrick Lamar . 221 In 2006 the documentary Ali Rap was produced by ESPN with Chuck D of Public Enemy as the host. 310 Other rappers narrated the documentary as well including Doug E Fresh Ludacris and Rakim who all spoke on Alis behalf in the film. Ali has been cited as an inspiration by rappers such as LL Cool J 220 Chuck D 311 Jay-Z Eminem Sean Combs Slick Rick Nas and MC Lyte . 312 Ali has been referenced in a number of hip hop songs including Migos Fight Night Nass The Message The Sugarhill Gang s Rappers Delight the Fugees Ready or Not EPMD s Youre a Customer and Will Smith s Gettin Jiggy wit It . 312 In Alis hometown In 1978 shortly after becoming heavyweight champion of the world for the third time and three years before his permanent retirement Ali received a round of accolades in his hometown of Louisville. In September at a tribute ceremony held at Fairgrounds Stadium then-Governor of Kentucky Julian Carroll proclaimed 1978 the Year of Ali and presented to Ali the Governors Distinguished Service Award. Carroll said he signed the proclamation because no single day or week or even month ever could contain the deeds of this man. 313 In November the Louisville Board of Aldermen voted 65 to rename downtown thoroughfare Walnut Street to Muhammad Ali Boulevard via an ordinance shortly signed into law by then-Mayor William B. Stansbury . 314 This was controversial at the time as within a week 12 of the 70 street signs were stolen. 315 The Muhammad Ali Center alongside Interstate 64 on Louisville Kentuckys riverfront As the street renaming was under consideration a committee of the Jefferson County Public Schools Kentucky considered renaming Alis alma mater Central High School in his honor. Despite an initial endorsement by then- Jefferson County JudgeExecutive and current U.S. Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell and an affirmative vote by the Jefferson County Fiscal Court the committee decided not to proceed citing long-time school tradition and alumni disagreement even though they urged other ways to honor Ali in the community. 316 In time Muhammad Ali Boulevardand Ali himselfcame to be well accepted in his hometown. 315 In November 2005 Ali and his wife Lonnie Ali opened the 54 million 93 000 ft 2 non-profit Muhammad Ali Center in downtown Louisville. 157 317 In addition to displaying his boxing memorabilia the center focuses on core themes of peace social responsibility respect and personal growth. 317 318 319 On January 16 2019 the Louisville Regional Airport Authority voted to change the name of the citys main airport to Louisville Muhammad Ali International Airport in honor of Ali. 320 Then-Louisville mayor Greg Fischer upon the occasion said: Muhammad Ali belonged to the world but he only had one hometown and fortunately that is our great city of Louisville. Muhammad became one of the most well-known people to ever walk the Earth and has left a legacy of humanitarianism and athleticism that has inspired billions of people. It is important that we as a city further champion The Champs legacy and the airport renaming is a wonderful next step. 320 On June 6 2019 the airport unveiled its new logo featuring Alis silhouette arms up and victorious against the background of a butterfly. 321 Around the US and world Martial artist and actor Bruce Lee was influenced by Ali whose footwork he studied and incorporated into his own style while developing Jeet Kune Do in the 1960s. 322 Opened in 1976 Ali Mall located in Araneta Center Quezon City Philippines is named after Ali. Construction of the mall the first of its kind in the Philippines began shortly after his victory in a match with Joe Frazier in nearby Araneta Coliseum in 1975. Ali attended its opening. 323 The Muhammad Ali vs. Antonio Inoki fight the same year played an important role in the history of mixed martial arts . 324 In Japan the match inspired Inokis students Masakatsu Funaki and Minoru Suzuki to found Pancrase in 1993 which in turn inspired the foundation of Pride Fighting Championships in 1997. Pride was acquired by its rival Ultimate Fighting Championship in 2007. 325 326 President George W. Bush embraces Ali after presenting him with the Presidential Medal of Freedom in 2005 during ceremonies at the White House. Ali was the recipient of the 1997 Arthur Ashe Courage Award . 327 He was presented with the Presidential Citizens Medal by President Bill Clinton in January 2001 328 and with the Presidential Medal of Freedom by President George W. Bush in November 2005. 329 330 For his work with the civil rights movement and the United Nations he received the Otto Hahn Peace Medal in Gold from the UN Association of Germany DGVN in Berlin in December 2005. 331 The Muhammad Ali Boxing Reform Act was introduced in 1999 and passed in 2000 to protect the rights and welfare of boxers in the United States. In May 2016 a bill was introduced to United States Congress by Markwayne Mullin a politician and former MMA fighter to extend the Ali Act to mixed martial arts . 332 In June 2016 US senator Rand Paul proposed an amendment to the US draft laws named after Ali a proposal to eliminate the Selective Service System . 333 In June 2007 Ali received an honorary doctorate of humanities at Princeton University s 260th graduation ceremony. 334 In 2015 Sports Illustrated renamed its Sportsman Legacy Award to the Sports Illustrated s Muhammad Ali Legacy Award. The annual award was originally created in 2008 and honors former sports figures who embody the ideals of sportsmanship leadership and philanthropy as vehicles for changing the world . Ali first appeared on the magazines cover in 1963 and went on to be featured on numerous covers during his storied career. 335 The Society of Voice Arts and Sciences created the Muhammad Ali Voice of Humanity Honor in 2016 which is presented at its annual Voice Arts Awards. The award was created in collaboration with the Muhammad Ali Center and is presented to an individual whose voice through humanitarianism activism or personal sacrifice has made a decidedly positive impact on our national or global condition as a society . Sculptor Marc Mellon created the bronze sculpture for the award which depicts Ali mid-speech. 336 Recipients of the honor include Dr. Henry Louis Gates Ken Burns Vance Jones Lonnie Ali Stacey Abrams Wes Studi and Manuela Testolini. 337 In January 2017 the Muhammad Ali Commemorative Coin Act was introduced into the 115th Congress but was not enacted. 338 339 20th-century superlatives By the end of the 20th century Ali had made it onto several superlatives lists or otherwise was mentioned in superlative terms covering the century or a large portion thereof. Ali was ranked at or near the top of most lists of the 20th centurys greatest boxers. 340 341 342 He was crowned Sportsman of the Century by Sports Illustrated . 343 Named BBCs Sports Personality of the Century he received more votes than the other five candidates combined. 344 341 The Associated Press ranked him as the second best boxer and best heavyweight of the 20th century. 342 He was named Athlete of the Century by USA Today and ranked as the third greatest North American athlete of the 20th century by ESPN SportsCentury . Ali was named Kentucky Athlete of the Century by the Kentucky Athletic Hall of Fame in ceremonies at the Galt House East . 345 Ali was named one of the 100 most influential Americans of the 20th century by Life magazine in 1990. In 1993 the Associated Press reported that Ali was tied with Babe Ruth as the most recognized athlete out of over 800 dead or living athletes in America. The study found that over 97 of Americans over 12 years of age identified both Ali and Ruth. 346 In 1999 he was one of three athletes alongside Pele and Jackie Robinson named in Time magazines list of the 100 Most Important People of the 20th Century . 347 348 In media and popular culture Main article: Muhammad Ali in media and popular culture As a world champion boxer social activist sex symbol and pop culture icon Ali was the subject of numerous creative works including books films music video games TV shows and other. Muhammad Ali was often dubbed the worlds most famous person in the media. 349 350 Several of his fights were watched by an estimated 12 billion viewers between 1974 and 1980 and his lighting of the torch at the 1996 Atlanta Olympics was watched by an estimated 3.5 billion viewers. 230 Muhammad Ali pop art painting by John Stango Ali appeared on the cover of Sports Illustrated on 38 different occasions 351 second only to Michael Jordan s 50. 352 He also appeared on the cover of Time magazine 5 times. 353 In 2015 Harris Poll found that Ali was one of the three most recognizable athletes in the United States along with Michael Jordan and Babe Ruth . 354 On the set of Freedom Road Ali met Canadian singer-songwriter Michel 355 and subsequently helped create Michels album The First Flight of the Gizzelda Dragon and an unaired television special featuring them both. 356 Wax statue of Ali at Madame Tussauds London Ali was the subject of the British television program This Is Your Life in 1978 when he was surprised by Eamonn Andrews . 357 Ali was featured in Superman vs. Muhammad Ali a 1978 DC Comics comic book pitting the champ against the superhero. In 1979 Ali guest starred as himself in an episode of the NBC sitcom Diffrent Strokes . The shows title itself was inspired by the quote Different strokes for different folks popularized in 1966 by Ali who also inspired the title of the 1967 Syl Johnson song Different Strokes one of the most sampled songs in pop music history. 358 He also wrote several bestselling books about his career including The Greatest: My Own Story and The Soul of a Butterfly . The Muhammad Ali effect named after Ali is a term that came into use in psychology in the 1980s as he stated in The Greatest: My Own Story : I only said I was the greatest not the smartest. 212 According to this effect when people are asked to rate their intelligence and moral behavior in comparison to others people will rate themselves as more moral but not more intelligent than others. 359 360 Ali cooperated with Thomas Hauser on a biography Muhammad Ali: His Life and Times . The oral history was released in 1991. When We Were Kings a 1996 documentary about the Rumble in the Jungle won the Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature . 361 The 2001 biopic Ali garnered a Best Actor Oscar nomination for Will Smith for his portrayal of Ali. 362 Prior to making the film Smith rejected the role until Ali requested that he accept it. Smith said the first thing Ali told him was: Man youre almost pretty enough to play me. 363 In 2002 Ali was honored with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his contributions to the entertainment industry. 364 His star is the only one to be mounted on a vertical surface out of deference to his request that the name Muhammada name he shares with the Islamic prophet not be walked upon. 365 366 His 1966 fight against George Chuvalo was the subject of the 2003 documentary film The Last Round: Chuvalo vs. Ali . 367 A decade later The Trials of Muhammad Ali a documentary directed by Bill Siegel that focuses on Alis refusal of the draft during the Vietnam War opened in Manhattan in August 2013. 79 368 A 2013 made-for-TV movie titled Muhammad Alis Greatest Fight dramatized the same aspect of Alis life. Antoine Fuqua s documentary Whats My Name: Muhammad Ali was released in 2019. Then in September 2021 documentary filmmaker Ken Burns released the four-part docuseries Muhammad Ali spanning over eight hours on Alis life. The series which Burns began developing in early 2016 was broadcast on PBS . 369 370 Dave Zirin who watched an 8-hour rough cut of this documentary called it utterly outstanding and said the footage they found will blow minds . 371 In spring 2025 the officially authorized musical Ali based on Alis life will be debuting. Originally expected to debut at The Kentucky Center in Alis hometown of Louisville it will instead have its premiere at the Nederlander Theatre in Chicago before later moving on to Broadway . The musical is being directed and written by Clint Dyer deputy artistic director of Londons National Theatre and scored by Louisville Orchestra s music director and conductor Teddy Abrams . Rapper and record producer Q-Tip has joined the production as music director and co-lyricist along with Rich Tone Talauega as choreographers. 372 373 374 375 376 Professional boxing record Main article: Professional boxing record of Muhammad Ali 61 fights 56 wins 5 losses By knockout 37 1 By decision 19 4 No. Result Record Opponent Type Round time Date Age Location Notes 61 Loss 565 Trevor Berbick UD 10 Dec 11 1981 39 years 328 days Queen Elizabeth Sports Centre Nassau Bahamas 60 Loss 564 Larry Holmes RTD 10 15 3:00 Oct 2 1980 38 years 259 days Caesars Palace Paradise Nevada U.S. For WBC and vacant The Ring heavyweight titles 59 Win 563 Leon Spinks UD 15 Sep 15 1978 36 years 241 days Superdome New Orleans Louisiana U.S. Won WBA and The Ring heavyweight titles 58 Loss 553 Leon Spinks SD 15 Feb 15 1978 36 years 29 days Las Vegas Hilton Winchester Nevada U.S. Lost WBA WBC and The Ring heavyweight titles 57 Win 552 Earnie Shavers UD 15 Sep 29 1977 35 years 255 days Madison Square Garden New York City New York U.S. Retained WBA WBC and The Ring heavyweight titles 56 Win 542 Alfredo Evangelista UD 15 May 16 1977 35 years 119 days Capital Centre Landover Maryland U.S. Retained WBA WBC and The Ring heavyweight titles 55 Win 532 Ken Norton UD 15 Sep 28 1976 34 years 255 days Yankee Stadium New York City New York U.S. Retained WBA WBC and The Ring heavyweight titles 54 Win 522 Richard Dunn TKO 5 15 2:05 May 24 1976 34 years 128 days Olympiahalle Munich West Germany Retained WBA WBC and The Ring heavyweight titles 53 Win 512 Jimmy Young UD 15 Apr 30 1976 34 years 104 days Capital Centre Landover Maryland U.S. Retained WBA WBC and The Ring heavyweight titles 52 Win 502 Jean-Pierre Coopman KO 5 15 2:46 Feb 20 1976 34 years 34 days Roberto Clemente Coliseum San Juan Puerto Rico Retained WBA WBC and The Ring heavyweight titles 51 Win 492 Joe Frazier RTD 14 15 3:00 Oct 1 1975 33 years 257 days Philippine Coliseum Quezon City Philippines Retained WBA WBC and The Ring heavyweight titles 50 Win 482 Joe Bugner UD 15 July 1 1975 377 33 years 164 days Stadium Merdeka Kuala Lumpur Malaysia Retained WBA WBC and The Ring heavyweight titles 49 Win 472 Ron Lyle TKO 11 15 1:08 May 16 1975 33 years 119 days Las Vegas Convention Center Winchester Nevada U.S. Retained WBA WBC and The Ring heavyweight titles 48 Win 462 Chuck Wepner TKO 15 15 2:41 Mar 24 1975 33 years 66 days Coliseum Richfield Ohio U.S. Retained WBA WBC and The Ring heavyweight titles 47 Win 452 George Foreman KO 8 15 2:58 Oct 30 1974 32 years 286 days Stade du 20 Mai Kinshasa Zaire Won WBA WBC and The Ring heavyweight titles 46 Win 442 Joe Frazier UD 12 Jan 28 1974 32 years 11 days Madison Square Garden New York City New York U.S. Retained NABF heavyweight title 45 Win 432 Rudie Lubbers UD 12 Oct 20 1973 31 years 276 days Gelora Bung Karno Stadium Jakarta Indonesia 44 Win 422 Ken Norton SD 12 Sep 10 1973 31 years 236 days The Forum Inglewood California U.S. Won NABF heavyweight title 43 Loss 412 Ken Norton SD 12 Mar 31 1973 31 years 73 days Sports Arena San Diego California U.S. Lost NABF heavyweight title 42 Win 411 Joe Bugner UD 12 Feb 14 1973 31 years 28 days Las Vegas Convention Center Winchester Nevada U.S. 41 Win 401 Bob Foster KO 8 12 0:40 Nov 21 1972 30 years 309 days Sahara Tahoe Stateline Nevada U.S. Retained NABF heavyweight title 40 Win 391 Floyd Patterson RTD 7 12 3:00 Sep 20 1972 30 years 247 days Madison Square Garden New York City New York U.S. Retained NABF heavyweight title 39 Win 381 Alvin Lewis TKO 11 12 1:15 Jul 19 1972 30 years 184 days Croke Park Dublin Ireland 38 Win 371 Jerry Quarry TKO 7 12 0:19 Jun 27 1972 30 years 162 days Las Vegas Convention Center Winchester Nevada U.S. Retained NABF heavyweight title 37 Win 361 George Chuvalo UD 12 May 1 1972 30 years 105 days Pacific Coliseum Vancouver British Columbia Canada Retained NABF heavyweight title 36 Win 351 Mac Foster UD 15 Apr 1 1972 30 years 75 days Nippon Budokan Tokyo Japan 35 Win 341 Jurgen Blin KO 7 12 2:12 Dec 26 1971 29 years 343 days Hallenstadion Zurich Switzerland 34 Win 331 Buster Mathis UD 12 Nov 17 1971 29 years 304 days Astrodome Houston Texas U.S. Retained NABF heavyweight title 33 Win 321 Jimmy Ellis TKO 12 12 2:10 Jul 26 1971 29 years 190 days Astrodome Houston Texas U.S. Won vacant NABF heavyweight title 32 Loss 311 Joe Frazier UD 15 Mar 8 1971 29 years 50 days Madison Square Garden New York City New York U.S. For WBA WBC and The Ring heavyweight titles 31 Win 310 Oscar Bonavena TKO 15 15 2:03 Dec 7 1970 28 years 324 days Madison Square Garden New York City New York U.S. Won vacant NABF heavyweight title 30 Win 300 Jerry Quarry RTD 3 15 3:00 Oct 26 1970 28 years 282 days Municipal Auditorium Atlanta Georgia U.S. 29 Win 290 Zora Folley KO 7 15 1:48 Mar 22 1967 25 years 64 days Madison Square Garden New York City New York U.S. Retained WBA WBC NYSAC and The Ring heavyweight titles 28 Win 280 Ernie Terrell UD 15 Feb 6 1967 25 years 20 days Astrodome Houston Texas U.S. Retained WBC NYSAC and The Ring heavyweight titles; Won WBA heavyweight title 27 Win 270 Cleveland Williams TKO 3 15 1:08 Nov 14 1966 24 years 301 days Astrodome Houston Texas U.S. Retained WBC NYSAC and The Ring heavyweight titles 26 Win 260 Karl Mildenberger TKO 12 15 1:30 Sep 10 1966 24 years 236 days Waldstadion Frankfurt West Germany Retained WBC NYSAC and The Ring heavyweight titles 25 Win 250 Brian London KO 3 15 1:40 Aug 6 1966 24 years 201 days Earls Court Exhibition Centre London England Retained WBC NYSAC and The Ring heavyweight titles 24 Win 240 Henry Cooper TKO 6 15 1:38 May 21 1966 24 years 124 days Arsenal Stadium London England Retained WBC NYSAC and The Ring heavyweight titles 23 Win 230 George Chuvalo UD 15 Mar 29 1966 24 years 71 days Maple Leaf Gardens Toronto Canada Retained WBC NYSAC and The Ring heavyweight titles 22 Win 220 Floyd Patterson TKO 12 15 2:18 Nov 22 1965 23 years 309 days Las Vegas Convention Center Winchester Nevada U.S. Retained WBC NYSAC and The Ring heavyweight titles 21 Win 210 Sonny Liston KO 1 15 2:12 May 25 1965 23 years 128 days Civic Center Lewiston Maine U.S. Retained WBC NYSAC and The Ring heavyweight titles 20 Win 200 Sonny Liston RTD 6 15 3:00 Feb 25 1964 22 years 39 days Convention Center Miami Beach Florida U.S. Won WBA WBC NYSAC and The Ring heavyweight titles 19 Win 190 Henry Cooper TKO 5 10 2:15 Jun 18 1963 21 years 152 days Wembley Stadium London England 18 Win 180 Doug Jones UD 10 Mar 13 1963 21 years 55 days Madison Square Garden New York City New York U.S. 17 Win 170 Charlie Powell KO 3 10 2:04 Jan 24 1963 21 years 7 days Civic Arena Pittsburgh Pennsylvania U.S. 16 Win 160 Archie Moore TKO 4 10 1:35 Nov 15 1962 20 years 302 days Memorial Sports Arena Los Angeles California U.S. 15 Win 150 Alejandro Lavorante KO 5 10 1:48 Jul 20 1962 20 years 184 days Memorial Sports Arena Los Angeles California U.S. 14 Win 140 Billy Daniels TKO 7 10 2:21 May 19 1962 20 years 122 days St. Nicholas Arena New York City New York U.S. 13 Win 130 George Logan TKO 4 10 1:34 Apr 23 1962 20 years 96 days Memorial Sports Arena Los Angeles California U.S. 12 Win 120 Don Warner TKO 4 10 0:34 Feb 28 1962 20 years 70 days Convention Center Miami Beach Florida U.S. 11 Win 110 Sonny Banks TKO 4 10 0:26 Feb 10 1962 20 years 24 days Madison Square Garden New York City New York U.S. 10 Win 100 Willi Besmanoff TKO 7 10 1:55 Nov 29 1961 19 years 316 days Freedom Hall Louisville Kentucky U.S. 9 Win 90 Alex Miteff TKO 6 10 1:45 Oct 7 1961 19 years 263 days Freedom Hall Louisville Kentucky U.S. 8 Win 80 Alonzo Johnson UD 10 Jul 22 1961 19 years 186 days Freedom Hall Louisville Kentucky U.S. 7 Win 70 Duke Sabedong UD 10 Jun 26 1961 19 years 160 days Las Vegas Convention Center Winchester Nevada U.S. 6 Win 60 LaMar Clark KO 2 8 1:27 Apr 19 1961 19 years 92 days Freedom Hall Louisville Kentucky U.S. 5 Win 50 Donnie Fleeman RTD 6 8 Feb 21 1961 19 years 35 days Municipal Auditorium Miami Beach Florida U.S. 4 Win 40 Jim Robinson KO 1 8 1:34 Feb 7 1961 19 years 21 days Convention Center Miami Beach Florida U.S. 3 Win 30 Tony Esperti TKO 3 8 1:30 Jan 17 1961 19 years 0 days Municipal Auditorium Miami Beach Florida U.S. 2 Win 20 Herb Siler TKO 4 8 1:00 Dec 27 1960 18 years 345 days Municipal Auditorium Miami Beach Florida U.S. 1 Win 10 Tunney Hunsaker UD 6 Oct 29 1960 18 years 286 days Freedom Hall Louisville Kentucky U.S. Discography Further information: Muhammad Ali in media and popular culture I Am the Greatest 1963 The Adventures of Ali and His Gang vs. Mr. Tooth Decay 1976 See also United States portal Biography portal Islam portal Sports portal Martial arts portal Olympics portal List of world heavyweight boxing champions List of WBA world champions List of WBC world champions List of The Ring world champions List of undisputed world boxing champions List of converts to Islam List of boxing families List of people from the Louisville metropolitan area List of American Muslims 1981 MAPS Wells Fargo embezzlement scandal Notes These records are shared with Joe Louis and Jose Napoles respectively. Both these records were eventually beaten by Wladimir Klitschko . Some sources claim that Joe Louis has actually defeated 22 fighters for the world heavyweight title; that would make Louis the sole holder of the eventually broken record. References a b Boxing record for Muhammad Ali from BoxRec registration required . Retrieved June 5 2016. Wells John C. 2008. Ali . Longman Pronunciation Dictionary 3rd ed.. Longman. ISBN 978-1-4058-8118-0 . the former boxer Muhammad Ali pronounces li Peter Josh July 11 2016. Why Muhammad Ali never legally changed name from Cassius Clay . USA Today . Archived from the original on July 11 2016 . Retrieved July 12 2016 . a b c d e f g Johnson Rafer 2002. Great Athletes . Vol. 1 revised ed.. Salem Press. pp. 3841. ISBN 978-1-58765-008-6 . Archived from the original on October 31 2023 . Retrieved July 24 2023 . Barber Can Relax Hair . The Philadelphia Inquirer . October 15 1997. Archived from the original on October 25 2012 . Retrieved September 4 2009 . Cassius Marcellus Clay Sr. Former Champions Father 77 . The New York Times . Associated Press. February 10 1990. Archived from the original on October 31 2023 . Retrieved September 4 2009 . Egerton John 1991. Shades of Gray: Dispatches from the Modern South . LSU Press . p. 134. ISBN 978-0-8071-1705-7 . Retrieved June 24 2016 . Muhammad Ali: Boxers ancestral Irish town pays tribute after death . BBC. June 4 2016. Archived from the original on June 7 2016 . Retrieved June 4 2016 . Ali has Irish ancestry . BBC News . February 9 2002. Archived from the original on June 7 2009 . Retrieved August 5 2009 . Reitwiesner Williams Addams . Ancestry of Muhammad Ali . Archived from the original on October 22 2007 . Retrieved May 1 2011 . Muhammad Alis Irish roots . IrishCentral.com . June 3 2020. Archived from the original on December 22 2022 . Retrieved February 14 2021 . Muhammad Ali: Boxers ancestral Irish town pays tribute after death . BBC News . June 4 2016. Archived from the original on July 27 2018 . Retrieved June 22 2018 . DNA evidence links Muhammad Ali to heroic slave family says . Washington Post . Archived from the original on April 4 2019 . Retrieved October 3 2018 . Hauser 2004 p. 14 a b Eig Jonathan 2017. Ali: A Life: Shortlisted for the William Hill Sports Book of the Year 2017 . Simon Schuster . ISBN 978-1-4711-5596-3 . Archived from the original on October 31 2023 . Retrieved July 24 2023 . a b Hauser Thomas. The Importance of Muhammad Ali . Gilder Lehrman Institute . Archived from the original on June 8 2016 . Retrieved June 5 2016 . Hampton Henry ; Fayer Steve; Flynn Sarah 1990. Voices of Freedom: An Oral History of the Civil Rights Movement from the 1950s through the 1980s . Bantam Books . p. 321 . ISBN 978-0-553-05734-8 . Gorn Elliott 1998. Muhammad Ali: The Peoples Champ . University of Illinois Press. pp. 7677. ISBN 978-0-252-06721-1 . Kandel Elmo April 1 2006. Boxing Legend Muhammad Ali . Article Click . Elmo Kandel. Archived from the original on June 11 2008 . Retrieved March 9 2009 . Muhammad Ali . University of Florida . Archived from the original on May 31 2008 . Retrieved May 20 2008 . The Soul of a Butterfly: Reflections on Lifes Journey . Simon and Schuster. 2013. p. 18. Fernandez Pedro Fernandez September 2 2007. Godfather Of Cutmen-Chuck Bodak Suffers Stroke . RingTalk . Archived from the original on April 14 2015 . Retrieved April 14 2015 . Gray Geoffey June 4 2016. How Muhammad Ali Became a Boxer Daily Intelligencer . New York . Archived from the original on June 9 2016 . Retrieved June 26 2016 . Ward Nathan October 2006. A Total Eclipse of the Sonny . American Heritage . Archived from the original on January 11 2007. a b c d e f g h Hauser 2004 Calkins Matt November 17 2014. Archie Moore was the KO king . U-T San Diego . Archived from the original on August 11 2016 . Retrieved June 15 2016 . Krantz Les 2008. Ali in Action: The Man the Moves the Mouth . Globe Pequot. ISBN 978-1-59921-302-6 . Retrieved June 15 2016 via Google Books. Velin Bob June 4 2016. Fight by fight: Muhammad Alis legendary career . USA Today . Archived from the original on June 15 2016 . Retrieved June 15 2016 . Bob Mee Ali and Liston: The Boy Who Would Be King and the Ugly Bear 2011. Capouya John December 12 2005. King Strut . Sports Illustrated . Archived from the original on June 3 2011 . Retrieved March 14 2017 . Burkholder Denny June 6 2016. How Muhammad Alis fascination with pro wrestling fueled his career inspired MMA . CBS Sports . Archived from the original on August 7 2022 . Retrieved October 2 2016 . Irusta Carlos January 17 2012. Dundee: Ali was still is The Greatest . ESPN . Archived from the original on January 19 2012 . Retrieved January 17 2012 . Haygood Wil 2011. Sweet Thunder: The Life and Times of Sugar Ray Robinson . Chicago Review Press . p. 378. ISBN 978-1-56976-864-8 . Archived from the original on October 31 2023 . Retrieved June 24 2016 . a b c Lipsyte Robert February 26 1964. Clay Wins Title in Seventh-Round Upset As Liston Is Halted by Shoulder Injury . The New York Times . Archived from the original on April 10 2009 . Retrieved December 27 2008 . Remnick David 2014. King of the World: Muhammad Ali and the Rise of an American Hero . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. p. 147. ISBN 9780804173629 . Archived from the original on December 15 2023 . Retrieved April 23 2024 . Sugar Bert Randolph 2003. Bert Sugar on Boxing: The Best of the Sports Most Notable Writer . Globe Pequot. p. 196. ISBN 978-1-59228-048-3 . Archived from the original on November 3 2023 . Retrieved November 3 2023 . McLeod Kembrew Pranksters: Making Mischief in the Modern World pp. 223224. Cassius Clay versus Sonny Liston . Theatre Network Television . ESPN Classic . February 25 1964. Archived from the original on December 3 2018 . Retrieved November 2 2023 via kumite27 YouTube. Cuddy Jack November 14 1964. Clay Undergoes Surgery; Fight Is Off Indefinitely . The Bridgeport Telegram . p. 1. Archived from the original on March 15 2017 . Retrieved March 14 2017 via Newspapers.com . Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : Muhammad Ali vs Sonny Liston I II Highlights Ali Becomes World Champion Phantom Punch Fight! . YouTube . Retrieved June 20 2018 . Anderson Dave January 16 1992. Sports of The Times; On His 50th Ali Is Still The Greatest . The New York Times . Archived from the original on December 21 2013 . Retrieved January 25 2012 . Vachss Andrew 2003. Only Child . Vintage. p. 89. Archived from the original on May 27 2016 . Retrieved June 6 2016 . Vachss further explains the way such a fix would have been engineered in Two Trains Running . Pantheon. 2005. pp. 160165 233. Archived from the original on July 16 2016 . Retrieved June 4 2016 . a b Belth Alex August 27 2012. AliPatterson: The Real Story . Sports on Earth . Archived from the original on November 8 2017 . Retrieved June 3 2016 . Boxing Muhammad Ali Rank Cinema Wardour Street London . GettyImages. August 16 2017. Archived from the original on August 26 2022 . Retrieved December 11 2020 . Ezra Michael 2013. The Economic Civil Rights Movement: African Americans and the Struggle for Economic Power . Routledge . p. 105. ISBN 978-1-136-27475-6 . Archived from the original on October 31 2023 . Retrieved July 24 2023 . Shalit Nevin I. July 15 1980. Muhammad Ali: Losing the Real Title . The Harvard Crimson . Archived from the original on September 4 2015 . Retrieved August 19 2015 . Fatsis Stefan June 8 2016. No Viet Cong Ever Called Me Nigger . Slate . ISSN 1091-2339 . Archived from the original on March 22 2023 . Retrieved March 24 2023 . Dundee Angelo; Maule Tex August 28 1967. He Could Go To Jail And Still Be Champ . Sports Illustrated . Maule Tex February 13 1967. Cruel Ali With All The Skills . Sports Illustrated . Archived from the original on March 9 2013. a b Metz Nina August 31 2013. The trials of a Chicago director making Muhammad Ali doc . Chicago Tribune . Archived from the original on July 23 2016 . Retrieved July 31 2016 . a b c Foley Michael 2003 Confronting the War Machine: Draft Resistance during the Vietnam War University of North Carolina Press ISBN 978-0-8078-5436-5 archived from the original on October 16 2015 Clay may be put into 1-A class today . Lodi News-Sentinel . United Press International. February 10 1967. p. 13. Archived from the original on August 7 2022 . Retrieved September 7 2020 . a b Neel Eric. Page2 Muhammad Ali from A to Z . ESPN . Archived from the original on November 2 2014 . Retrieved November 5 2013 . a b Roberts Randy 1991. Winning is the Only Thing: Sports in America Since 1945 . Johns Hopkins University Press. pp. 171172. Network Warfare History. Vietnam War: Muhammad Alis Draft Controversy . The National Interest . Archived from the original on January 17 2021 . Retrieved February 21 2022 . Remnick David 2014. King of the World: Muhammad Ali and the Rise of an American Hero . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. p. 287. ISBN 9780804173629 . Archived from the original on August 13 2024 . Retrieved April 23 2024 . Haas Jeffrey 2009. The Assassination of Fred Hampton: How the FBI and the Chicago Police Murdered a Black Panther . Lawrence Hill Books. p. 27. ISBN 978-1-55652-765-4 . Archived from the original on October 31 2023 . Retrieved July 24 2023 . Hallett Alison. Not So Fast . Portland Mercury . Archived from the original on November 13 2013 . Retrieved December 27 2013 . a b Rhoden William C. June 20 2013. In Alis Voice From the Past a Stand for the Ages . The New York Times . Archived from the original on February 16 2017 . Retrieved February 11 2017 . Muhammad Ali refuses Army induction . History.com . Archived from the original on November 6 2020 . Retrieved November 5 2020 . Kellum B. F. April 29 1967. Appeals Could Take 18 Months . The Asheville Citizen . AP. p. 11. Archived from the original on May 20 2023 . Retrieved May 20 2023 via Newspapers.com . Reemstsma Jean 1999. More Than a Champion: The Style of Muhammad Ali . New York: Vintage. ISBN 978-0-375-70005-7 . Archived from the original on January 17 2023 . Retrieved March 14 2012 . Remembering Clevelands Muhammad Ali Summit 45 years later Archived July 22 2020 at the Wayback Machine Branson Wright for The Plain Dealer via Cleveland.com June 3 2012. Retrieved July 23 2020. Conversation with Muhammad Ali . WGBH Library of Congress American Archive of Public Broadcasting WGBH and the Library of Congress Boston MA and Washington DC. July 7 1968 . Retrieved March 15 2020 . Cassius Marsellus CLAY Jr. also known as Muhammad Ali Petitioner v. United States . LII Legal Information Institute . Archived from the original on June 20 2022 . Retrieved February 8 2017 . The Greatest Is Gone . Time . February 27 1978. p. 5. Archived from the original on September 30 2007 . Retrieved August 4 2007 . Cassius Marsellus Clay Jr. also known as Muhammad Ali Petitioner v. United States. LII Legal Information Institute . Law.cornell.edu. Archived from the original on June 20 2022 . Retrieved November 5 2013 . Clay v. United States The Oyez Project at IIT Chicago-Kent College of Law . Oyez.org. Archived from the original on October 29 2013 . Retrieved November 5 2013 . Day at Night: Muhammad Ali legendary boxing champion . CUNY TV . February 19 1974. Event occurs at 21:50. Archived from the original on March 8 2021 . Retrieved November 5 2023 . Interview with Muhammad Ali . digital.wustl.edu . Archived from the original on October 10 2020 . Retrieved September 21 2020 . Oprah Talks to Muhammad Ali . Oprah.com . Archived from the original on April 21 2021 . Retrieved September 21 2020 . Star-Ledger Jerry Izenberg For The June 4 2016. Why I called Muhammad Ali my friend . nj.com . Archived from the original on November 23 2020 . Retrieved September 21 2020 . Wolfson Andrew. Muhammad Ali lost everything in opposing the Vietnam War. But in 1968 he triumphed . USA Today . Archived from the original on August 10 2020 . Retrieved September 21 2020 . Interview with Kareem Abdul-Jabbar . Digital.wustl.edu. March 3 1989. Archived from the original on October 29 2013 . Retrieved November 5 2013 . Muhammad Ali: The man who changed his sport and his country . BBC. June 5 2016. Archived from the original on June 17 2019 . Retrieved June 22 2018 . a b Ezra Michael 2009. Muhammad Alis Main Bout: African American Economic Power and the World Heavyweight Title . Muhammad Ali: The Making of an Icon . Temple University Press . p. 82. ISBN 978-1-59213-661-2 . Archived from the original on October 31 2023 . Retrieved July 24 2023 . Dundee: Ali was still is The Greatest . ESPN . January 17 2012. Archived from the original on October 14 2013 . Retrieved November 5 2013 . Whitcomb Dan June 5 2016. Former Ali promoter Bob Arum recalls boxers impact on society . Reuters . Archived from the original on August 4 2020 . Retrieved April 24 2024 . a b Rapold Nicolas August 22 2013. One of His Biggest Fights Was Outside of the Ring . The New York Times . Archived from the original on July 1 2016 . Retrieved August 29 2016 . Zirin Dave June 4 2016. The Hidden History of Muhammad Ali . Jacobin . Archived from the original on February 24 2017 . Retrieved April 17 2017 . a b Pilkington Ed September 26 2013. Declassified NSA files show agency spied on Muhammad Ali and MLK . The Guardian . Archived from the original on September 26 2013 . Retrieved April 16 2017 . Medsger Betty June 6 2016. In 1971 Muhammad Ali Helped Undermine the FBIs Illegal Spying on Americans . The Intercept . Archived from the original on April 27 2017 . Retrieved April 17 2017 . Muhammad Ali refuses Army induction . History . Archived from the original on November 6 2020. Glanton Dahleen June 4 2016. Muhammad Alis exile years in Chicago: Learning about life . Chicago Tribune . Archived from the original on November 26 2020 . Retrieved December 1 2020 . Tinsley Justin January 17 2018. What if the Muhammad Ali we knew had never existed? . Andscape . Archived from the original on August 17 2022 . Retrieved April 6 2021 . Case of Muhammad Ali: The Ultimate Civil Disobedience . The Austin American . May 3 1967. p. 24. Archived from the original on June 15 2021 . Retrieved April 6 2021 . Secret Honeymoon of the Champ: Muhammad Ali joins Muslim speaking tour with his wedding trip . Ebony . Vol. 23 no. 1. November 1967. pp. 146151 151. Archived from the original on October 31 2023 . Retrieved July 24 2023 . a b Ali vs. Marciano: Who wins? . The Enterprise . September 1 2009. Archived from the original on September 14 2016 . Retrieved July 19 2016 . The forgotten story of ... the Rocky Marciano v Muhammad Ali Super Fight . The Guardian . November 13 2012. Archived from the original on July 25 2023 . Retrieved July 19 2016 . Bingham Howard; Wallace Max 2000. Muhammad Alis Greatest Fight: Cassius Clay vs. the United States of America . M. Evans. p. 218 . ISBN 978-0-87131-900-5 . Matthew October 1 2005. Knockout: An oral history of Muhammad Ali Atlanta and the fight nobody wanted . Atlanta Magazine . Archived from the original on October 31 2019 . Retrieved October 31 2019 . Clay granted New York ring license . The Palm Beach Post . Associated Press. September 15 1970. p. B4. Archived from the original on September 12 2016 . Retrieved June 6 2016 . Kang Jay Caspian April 4 2013. The End and Don King . Grantland . ESPN . Archived from the original on April 6 2013 . Retrieved April 4 2013 . McDougall Christopher 2014. The Best American Sports Writing 2014 . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt . p. 149. ISBN 978-0-544-14700-3 . Archived from the original on October 31 2023 . Retrieved July 24 2023 . Keating Steve March 5 2021. Ali Frazier Fight of the Century still packs a punch 50 years on . Reuters . Archived from the original on March 6 2021 . Retrieved March 16 2021 . Alis Remark Ended Wilts Ring Career . Los Angeles Times . January 15 1989. Morning Briefing. Archived from the original on June 3 2016 . Retrieved February 20 2020 . OReilly Terry March 3 2016. Achilles Heel Advertising: Repositioning the Competition . Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. Archived from the original on March 28 2016 . Retrieved August 30 2018 . Victor at 22012 in Command of Houston Bout . The New York Times . July 27 1971. Archived from the original on May 17 2022 . Retrieved May 18 2022 . Hissner Ken April 21 2023. Muhammad Ali Talks About His Relationship With Elvis! . Boxing News. Archived from the original on April 8 2024 . Retrieved April 8 2024 . a b Selbe Nick March 31 2020. This Day in History: Ken Norton Breaks Muhammad Alis Jaw . Sports Illustrated . Archived from the original on April 8 2024 . Retrieved April 8 2024 . Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : Muhammad Ali The Rumble In The JungleInterview . YouTube. March 22 1967 . Retrieved September 3 2013 . Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : Muhammad Ali Inspirational Speech Cassius Clay Boxing Motivation . YouTube. September 14 2012 . Retrieved September 3 2013 . Foreman George January 2012. George Foreman on why Muhammad Ali was so much more than a boxer . ShortList . Archived from the original on June 11 2016 . Retrieved June 6 2016 . Lee Bill November 18 1974. Zaires fight promotion opens new gold mines . The Morning Herald . p. 30. Archived from the original on January 15 2024 . Retrieved January 15 2024 via Newspapers.com . Ali Regains Title Flooring Foreman . The New York Times . October 30 1974. Archived from the original on June 15 2021 . Retrieved June 7 2019 . Rumble in the Jungle: the night Ali became King of the World again . The Guardian . October 29 2014. Archived from the original on October 29 2014 . Retrieved October 29 2014 . Revisiting The Rumble in the Jungle 40 years later . USA Today . October 29 2014. Archived from the original on November 1 2021 . Retrieved May 11 2018 . Mike Tyson May Fight George Foreman In Biggest Money Match: 80 Million . Jet . Vol. 88 no. 19. September 18 1995. p. 46. Archived from the original on October 31 2023 . Retrieved July 24 2023 . a b Gitonga Ruth February 7 2023. Most-watched television events in the world ever: Top 20 list ranked . briefly.co.za . Archived from the original on March 14 2023 . Retrieved November 5 2023 . Schneiderman R. M. August 10 2006. Stallone Settles With The Real Rocky . Forbes . Archived from the original on October 31 2023 . Retrieved October 16 2019 . Blaine Henry May 18 2019. History Lesson: Thrilla in Manila . Fight-Library.com. Archived from the original on October 31 2019 . Retrieved March 4 2020 . Muhammad Ali vs Jimmy Young ABC 1080p 60fps 1976 archived from the original on January 25 2023 retrieved January 25 2023 Jhoon Rhee Father of American Tae Kwon Do . jhoonrhee.com . Archived from the original on May 6 2019 . Retrieved May 1 2019 . Champion Ali Quits Boxing . The Paris News . October 1 1976. p. 12. Archived from the original on June 7 2012 . Retrieved October 19 2011 . Read Peter Finneys column on Ali vs. Spinks 2 at the Superdome in 1978 Archived April 19 2018 at the Wayback Machine The Times-Picayune NOLA.com New Orleans LA. re-posted on June 4 2016. Muhammad Ali The Glory Years Felix Dennis and Don Atyeo p. 258. The Last Flight of the Butterfly: Remembering Ali vs Spinks II Archived April 19 2018 at the Wayback Machine RingsideReport.com Kevin The Voice Kincade September 22 2016. Muhammad Ali Fast Facts . CNN . Archived from the original on March 27 2013 . Retrieved February 20 2013 . Koch Ed. Timeline: Fifty years of Las Vegas memories for Muhammad Ali . Las Vegas Sun . Archived from the original on November 12 2013 . Retrieved November 12 2013 . Barnes Bart October 15 1980. Ali Faces Ring Suspension . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on August 28 2017 . Retrieved April 5 2023 . Eig Jonathan September 30 2017. Failed drug test was sign of the great mans decline . The Times . Archived from the original on November 11 2022 . Retrieved April 5 2023 . Hale Mike October 26 2009. Boxing King Casts His Shadow Even at Time of Defeat . The New York Times . Archived from the original on March 10 2012 . Retrieved March 5 2012 . AP Archived November 12 2020 at the Wayback Machine Muhammad Alis doctor doubts boxing led to Parkinsons Associated Press via CBC June 6. 2016. Retrieved September 1 2018. a b Thomas Robert McG. Jr. September 20 1984. Change In Drug Helps Ali Improve . The New York Times . pp. D29. Archived from the original on June 16 2013 . Retrieved March 9 2009 . Ali to try again? . The Daytona Beach Sunday News-Journal . Associated Press. August 16 1981. Archived from the original on August 28 2021 . Retrieved June 4 2016 . Its all over for Ali after loss . Lawrence Journal-World . Associated Press. December 12 1981. Archived from the original on September 29 2021 . Retrieved June 4 2016 . Nack William December 21 1981. Not with a bang but a whisper . Sports Illustrated . Archived from the original on June 9 2016 . Retrieved June 4 2016 . Aaron Tallent. The Joke That Almost Ended Alis Career . The Sweet Science . Archived from the original on February 21 2012 . Retrieved July 11 2015 . Michael Dokes Larger-Than-Life Heavyweight Boxer Dies at 54 . The New York Times . August 14 2012. Archived from the original on August 23 2012 . Retrieved July 6 2015 . a b c d Sammy Davis Jr . LasVegasSun.com . Archived from the original on October 15 2023 . Retrieved June 8 2023 . Muhammad Ali Boxing Footballs Lyle Alzado . Boxing Hall of Fame . Archived from the original on July 15 2015 . Retrieved July 11 2015 . Greatest Hockey Legends.com: Ali vs. Semenko It Really Happened . Greatesthockeylegends.com . Archived from the original on July 6 2015 . Retrieved July 11 2015 . Filantropia Fundacion Jose Miguel Agrelot . Doncholito.org . Archived from the original on July 6 2015 . Retrieved July 11 2015 . a b c d Tallent Aaron February 20 2005. The Joke That Almost Ended Alis Career . The Sweet Science. Archived from the original on July 9 2016 . Retrieved December 4 2007 . Mather Victor June 5 2016. Alis Least Memorable Fight . The New York Times . Archived from the original on July 30 2022 . Retrieved February 11 2017 . a b Gross Josh June 25 2016. Muhammad Alis Forgotten Fight Was Also One of His Most Influential . Newsweek . Archived from the original on April 26 2019 . Retrieved April 10 2018 . Burkholder Denny June 6 2016. How Muhammad Alis fascination with pro wrestling fueled his career inspired MMA . CBS Sports . Archived from the original on August 7 2022 . Retrieved June 11 2016 . a b Hall Nick April 29 2020. Collision in Korea: Pyongyangs historic socialism and spandex spectacular . NK News . Archived from the original on June 3 2020 . Retrieved June 1 2020 . Vaughan Kevin. Goodbye Mile High . Denver Rocky Mountain News. Archived from the original on June 11 2008 . Retrieved March 26 2008 . Wyshynski Greg June 4 2016. When Muhammad Ali fought hockeys heavyweight champ Dave Semenko . ca.sports.yahoo.com . Archived from the original on January 31 2021 . Retrieved January 23 2021 . Ali Still Packs Quite a Wallop . The Calgary Herald . Edmonton. Canadian Press. June 13 1983. Archived from the original on June 21 2024 . Retrieved June 20 2024 . Micklos John Jr. 2010. Muhammad Ali: I Am the Greatest . Berkeley Heights NJ: Enslow Publishers . p. 54. ISBN 978-0-7660-3381-8 . a b Ep. 6: How Much You Gonna Pay Me? Rahman Ali . Ali: A Life . July 3 2017. Archived from the original on October 31 2020 . Retrieved October 27 2020 . Hauser Thomas 2012. Muhammad Ali: His Life and Times . Open Road Integrated Media. p. 252. ISBN 978-1-4532-4119-6 . Hauser Thomas 2012. Muhammad Ali: His Life and Times . Open Road Integrated Media. p. 288. ISBN 978-1-4532-4119-6 . The Secrets of Ali: Former Wife of Boxing Champ Tells All . nbcmiami.com . July 25 2019. Archived from the original on November 6 2022 . Retrieved November 6 2022 . Muhammad Alis Daughter May May Ali Writes Childrens Book About His Boxing Career . Jet . Vol. 104 no. 24. December 8 2003. pp. 3839. ISSN 0021-5996 . Archived from the original on October 31 2023 . Retrieved July 24 2023 via Google Books. Muhammad Alis son shut off from dad living in poverty . January 26 2014. Archived from the original on November 20 2021 . Retrieved November 20 2021 . For Muhammad Alis grandson family legacy extends beyond the ring . Washington Post . Archived from the original on December 10 2021 . Retrieved December 12 2021 . Alis camp now a bed and breakfast . ESPN . Archived from the original on February 9 2012 . Retrieved January 29 2012 . a b Rush George; Joanna Molloy; Lola Ogunnaike; Kasia Anderson March 18 2001. Ali Daughter Tosses Book in Ring . New York Daily News . Archived from the original on October 18 2016 . Retrieved October 15 2016 . Former three-time heavyweight boxing champion Muhammad Ali agreed Tuesday ... UPI . January 28 1986. Archived from the original on October 19 2016 . Retrieved October 15 2016 . Muhammed Ali Biography sic . Lifetime. May 23 2006. Archived from the original on April 4 2015 . Retrieved May 1 2015 . Peter Josh June 6 2016. Muhammad Alis ex-wife reveals details about their secret wedding . USA Today . Archived from the original on October 5 2018 . Retrieved June 6 2016 . Laila Ali expecting a baby . Sandrarose.com. March 26 2008. Archived from the original on May 7 2023 . Retrieved March 27 2015 . Pitzer Kurt June 9 2016. How Muhammad Alis Ex-Wives Forgave His Infidelity: Cheating Never Meant Anything to Him . People . Archived from the original on October 30 2020 . Retrieved October 28 2020 . a b c d Crouse Karen June 9 2016. Muhammad Ali Was Her First and Greatest Love . The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on June 3 2021 . Retrieved June 3 2021 . Allen Nick June 5 2016 Could Muhammad Alis 80m fortune become subject of bitter legal battle? Archived June 20 2018 at the Wayback Machine The Daily Telegraph . Brother: Muhammad Alis health failing . United Press International . Archived from the original on August 13 2014 . Retrieved September 4 2014 . Brewer Dale September 16 2018. When Ali was King . The Herald-Palladium . Archived from the original on September 16 2018 . Retrieved September 16 2018 . Shafer Sheldon S. January 25 2007. Ali coming home buys house in Jefferson County PDF . The Courier-Journal . Archived from the original PDF on March 25 2009 . Retrieved January 25 2007 . Sheridan Patricia December 3 2007. Patricia Sheridans Breakfast With ... Lonnie Ali . Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . Archived from the original on January 18 2012 . Retrieved January 7 2024 . Laila Ali . Womenboxing.com. Archived from the original on October 23 2012 . Retrieved January 29 2012 . Boxing- Muhammad Ali . Womenboxing.com. June 8 2001. Archived from the original on February 27 2021 . Retrieved January 29 2012 . Laila Ali With Her Father Watching Stays Undefeated . The New York Times . June 12 2005. Archived from the original on May 27 2018 . Retrieved May 26 2018 . Cepeda Elias June 4 2016. Kevin Casey will fight at UFC 199 despite passing of father-in-law Muhammad Ali . Fox Sports . Archived from the original on June 6 2016 . Retrieved June 6 2016 . Mohammed Sagal September 2 2018. My dad the greatest: Hana Ali recalls the crushing heartache that would haunt her father his whole life . You Magazine . Archived from the original on October 11 2020 . Retrieved October 11 2020 . Muhammad Ali confesses illness put a stop to his girl chasing but his son is just starting . Jet . Vol. 91 no. 10. January 27 1997. pp. 3233. ISSN 0021-5996 . Archived from the original on October 31 2023 . Retrieved March 14 2017 via Google Books. Miller Davis September 12 1993. Still Larger Than Life To Millions Muhammad Ali Will Always Be The Champ . The Seattle Times . Archived from the original on June 10 2022 . Retrieved May 3 2021 . Laufenberg Norbert B. 2005. Entertainment Celebrities . Trafford Publishing. p. 9. ISBN 978-1-4120-5335-8 . Archived from the original on October 31 2023 . Retrieved December 5 2010 . Bollinger Rhett. Angels draft boxing legend Alis son . Major League Baseball. Archived from the original on August 19 2014 . Retrieved June 5 2016 . Bucktin Christopher September 13 2014. Muhammad Alis secret daughter begs to see boxing legend one more time before he dies . Daily Mirror . Archived from the original on June 5 2016 . Retrieved June 6 2016 . Ofori-Mensah June 5 2016. 6 Facts About Kiiursti Mensah Ali Muhammed Alis Ghanaian Daughter You Need To Know sic . omgvoice.com. Archived from the original on June 6 2016 . Retrieved June 6 2016 . Foster Peter; Allen Nick June 4 2016. Muhammad Alis tangled love life leaves troubled legacy . The Daily Telegraph . Archived from the original on January 10 2022 . Retrieved June 6 2016 . Alis alleged lovechild talks to tabloids . The Daily Express . February 11 2010. Archived from the original on October 19 2016 . Retrieved October 15 2016 . An 18-year-old woman has filed suit seeking 3 million ... United Press International . April 24 1981. Archived from the original on May 28 2018 . Retrieved May 27 2018 . Temica Williams aka Rebecca Jean Holloway Plaintiff-Appellant v. Muhammad Ali Defendant-Appellee . All Court Data . Archived from the original on October 19 2016 . Retrieved October 15 2016 . Eig Jonathan 2017. Ali: A Life: Shortlisted for the William Hill Sports Book of the Year 2017 . Simon Schuster UK. ISBN 978-1-4711-5596-3 . Archived from the original on July 24 2023 . Retrieved July 24 2023 . Eig Jonathan 2017. Ali: A Life . London: Simon Schuster. p. 416. ISBN 978-1-4711-5593-2 . OCLC 968294310 . Ali: A Life: A biography thats not The Greatest The Ring . The Ring . September 29 2017. Archived from the original on May 17 2021 . Retrieved September 6 2020 . a b Mitchell Kevin June 4 2016. From the Vietnam war to Islam the key chapters in Alis life . The Guardian . Archived from the original on February 2 2018 . Retrieved June 5 2016 . Muslim Charge Clams Up Clay . The Pittsburgh Press . February 7 1964. Archived from the original on August 28 2021 . Retrieved September 7 2020 . Schwartz Larry. He is simply ... The Greatest . ESPN . Archived from the original on August 13 2018 . Retrieved March 4 2018 . Steinberg Neil June 4 2016. For a time Ali called Chicago home . Chicago Sun-Times . Archived from the original on June 5 2016 . Retrieved June 5 2016 . a b History website Muhammad Ali: Cassius Clay is my slave name . BBC. Archived from the original on June 28 2013 . Retrieved July 2 2013 . Gonzalez Susan June 9 2016. Muhammad Ali originally named for ardent abolitionist and Yale alumnus Cassius Clay . Yale News . Archived from the original on December 14 2019 . Retrieved August 17 2021 . Heritage of a Heavyweight . The New York Times . Archived from the original on June 15 2021 . Retrieved September 27 2020 . I am America: Muhammad Alis fight for civil rights . 9News . Australia. Agence France-Presse. June 5 2016. Archived from the original on June 5 2016 . Retrieved June 4 2016 . Handler M. S. March 9 1964. Malcolm X Splits with Muhammad . The New York Times . Archived from the original on July 20 2014 . Retrieved August 1 2008 . subscription required The Champ and Mr. X . National Review . February 29 2016. Archived from the original on February 1 2018 . Retrieved November 18 2016 . a b Ali Muhammad; Ali Hana Yasmeen 2004. The Soul of a Butterfly: Reflections on Lifes Journey . Simon Schuster . ISBN 978-0-7432-6286-6 . Archived from the original on October 31 2023 . Retrieved September 4 2016 . Garcia Courtney September 6 2013. Trials of Muhammad Ali highlights boxers anti-war opposition . theGrio. Archived from the original on October 29 2013 . Retrieved November 5 2013 . Mogul Priyanka June 4 2016. Muhammad Ali: Why the boxing legend converted to Islam and refused to serve in the Vietnam War . International Business Times . Archived from the original on August 24 2016 . Retrieved August 30 2016 . Bercaw Nancy; Ownby Ted eds.. The New Encyclopedia of Southern Culture: Volume 13: Gender . p. 291. Hauser Thomas 1992. Muhammad Ali: His Life and Times . Simon and Schuster. ISBN 978-0-671-77971-9 . Archived from the original on October 31 2023 . Retrieved July 24 2023 . Ali Muhammad; Ali Hana Yasmeen 2013. The Soul of a Butterfly . Simon Schuster. p. 85. Muhammed Alis Pilgrimage to Makkah sic . Emel . No. 17. February 2006. Archived from the original on September 14 2016 . Retrieved September 4 2016 . Bryan Chloe June 4 2016. Muhammad Ali had a thought-provoking response when asked about his retirement plans . Mashable . Archived from the original on September 10 2016 . Retrieved September 4 2016 . a b Rajeev K R June 5 2016. Muhammad Alis visit was Kozhikodes knockout moment . The Times of India . Archived from the original on June 10 2016 . Retrieved September 4 2016 . Muhammad Ali: The face of real Islam . Al Jazeera . June 6 2016. Archived from the original on February 17 2020 . Retrieved September 4 2016 . Muhammad Ali: Five things you never knew about the boxing legend . CNN . April 28 2016. Archived from the original on November 19 2016 . Retrieved November 18 2016 . Family faith and magic tricks: My 40-year friendship with Muhammad Ali . The Telegraph . March 4 2016. Archived from the original on January 10 2022 . Retrieved December 13 2016 . Muhammad Ali: Unapologetically Black Unapologetically Muslim . On Being . June 9 2016. Archived from the original on December 20 2016 . Retrieved December 13 2016 . Muhammad Alis New Spiritual Quest . Beliefnet . Archived from the original on December 20 2016 . Retrieved December 13 2016 . Timothy Gianotti The Imam whose on Muhammad Alis last days and funeral . On Being . June 9 2016. Archived from the original on September 27 2017 . Retrieved December 13 2016 . Prof. Gianotti plans Muhammad Alis funeral and memorial service . On Being . June 9 2016. Archived from the original on September 27 2017 . Retrieved December 13 2016 . Remnick David 2014. King of the World: Muhammad Ali and the Rise of an American Hero . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. p. 93. ISBN 9780804173629 . Archived from the original on May 23 2024 . Retrieved May 9 2024 . Remnick David 2014. King of the World: Muhammad Ali and the Rise of an American Hero . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. p. 135. ISBN 9780804173629 . Archived from the original on May 23 2024 . Retrieved May 10 2024 . Langer Adam November 28 2019. Muhammad Ali in a Broadway Musical? It Happened . The New York Times . Archived from the original on July 25 2020 . Retrieved December 6 2020 . Buck White . IBDB . Archived from the original on May 9 2022 . Retrieved May 9 2022 . Cartwright Keith Ryan February 3 2020. When black cowboys paraded through Harlem with Muhammad Ali . Andscape . Archived from the original on February 22 2024 . Retrieved June 2 2024 . a b Ali Muhammad; Durham Richard 1975. The Greatest: My Own Story . New York: Random House. ISBN 978-0-394-46268-4 . OCLC 1622063 . Archived from the original on October 31 2023 . Retrieved July 24 2023 . Freedom Road . Imdb . Archived from the original on November 7 2021 . Retrieved November 7 2021 . 30 of Muhammad Alis best quotes . USA Today . Archived from the original on April 19 2019 . Retrieved April 19 2019 . Song Stand By Me recorded in 1964 by Muhammad Ali then known as Cassius Clay . YouTube. December 13 2008. Archived from the original on October 22 2013 . Retrieved February 20 2013 . Different versions of Stand By Me . Secondhandsongs.com. Archived from the original on November 4 2012 . Retrieved February 20 2013 . Tinsley Justin June 8 2016. The Grammy-nominated Cassius Clay . Andscape . Archived from the original on August 10 2022 . Retrieved July 16 2022 . Muhammad Ali: Famed Pugilist Was Also Hip-Hop Pioneer . Rolling Stone . June 4 2016. Archived from the original on May 15 2018 . Retrieved August 22 2017 . a b Gates Henry Louis Jr. June 9 2016. Muhammad Ali the Political Poet . The New York Times . Archived from the original on October 26 2021 . Retrieved September 4 2016 . a b c Reeves Mosi June 4 2016. Muhammad Ali: Worlds Greatest Boxer Was Also Hip-Hop Pioneer . Rolling Stone . Archived from the original on May 15 2018 . Retrieved September 4 2016 . a b c d Rubin Mike June 5 2016. Muhammad Ali: 4 Ways He Changed America . Rolling Stone . Archived from the original on May 15 2018 . Retrieved September 4 2016 . Grammy Award Nominees 1964 Grammy Award Winners 1964 . Awards Shows . Archived from the original on December 13 2011 . Retrieved January 24 2023 . Muhammad Ali Boxing a Monsoon Boxing Hall of Fame . boxinghalloffame.com. December 29 2012. Archived from the original on September 16 2015 . Retrieved June 9 2016 . Burkett Harry ed. 2007. Historical Cards: WrestleMania I 03-31-1985 . PWI 2007 Wrestling Almanac Book of facts . Blue Bell Pennsylvania: London Publishing . p. 84. ISBN 978-25274-00389 . Muhammed Ali to be inducted into WWE Hall of fame class of 2024 . wwe.com . Archived from the original on March 11 2024 . Retrieved March 11 2024 . Colin Tessier April 6 2024. The Undertaker Inducts Muhammad Ali Into WWE Hall Of Fame Class Of 2024 . WrestleZone . Y! Entertainment . Archived from the original on April 6 2024 . Retrieved June 5 2024 . Academy Awards Show Ratings . TV by the Numbers . February 18 2009. Archived from the original on October 8 2016. Hauser Thomas 2012. Muhammad Ali: His Life and Times . Anova Books . p. 431. ISBN 978-1-907554-90-2 . Archived from the original on October 31 2023 . Retrieved July 24 2023 . Diffrent Strokes The Complete Second Season DVD Review . Sitcoms Online . Archived from the original on February 24 2021 . Retrieved September 1 2018 . a b c Hajeski Nancy J. 2013. Ali: The Official Portrait of The Greatest of All Time . Simon and Schuster. p. 293. ISBN 978-1-60710-983-9 . Archived from the original on October 31 2023 . Retrieved July 24 2023 . Toff Benjamin August 25 2008. Olympics Ratings Set Record . The New York Times . Archived from the original on September 4 2018 . Retrieved September 4 2018 . Heroes Telethon Raises 150 Million . billboard.com . September 25 2001. Archived from the original on January 27 2021 . Retrieved March 29 2021 . Weekly top 30 programmes . Broadcasters Audience Research Board . January 7 2007. Archived from the original on February 11 2015 . Retrieved September 1 2018 . a b Annual Report 2016 PDF . Muhammad Ali Center . January 2017. Archived from the original PDF on December 3 2020 . Retrieved August 19 2018 . Art by Muhammad Ali boxing icon sells for close to 1 million in New York auction . Washington Post . ISSN 0190-8286 . Archived from the original on November 28 2021 . Retrieved October 7 2021 . Villa Angelica October 6 2021. Muhammad Alis Little-Known Art Becomes a Hit at Auction . ARTnews.com . Archived from the original on October 6 2021 . Retrieved October 7 2021 . Calfas Jennifer October 6 2021. Boxing Legend Muhammad Alis Art Sells for Nearly 1 Million in Auction . The Wall Street Journal . ISSN 0099-9660 . Archived from the original on October 7 2021 . Retrieved October 7 2021 . A new biography of Muhammad Ali . The Economist . October 26 2017. Archived from the original on October 26 2017 . Retrieved October 27 2017 . Ali Leaves Hospital Vowing to take better care of himself and get more sleep . The New York Times . September 22 1984. Archived from the original on June 16 2013 . Retrieved March 9 2009 . Friedman J. H. 1989. Progressive parkinsonism in boxers . Southern Medical Journal . 82 5: 543546. doi : 10.109700007611-198905000-00002 . ISSN 0038-4348 . PMID 2655100 . WrestleMania I: Celebrities . Wwe.com. March 31 1985. Archived from the original on June 5 2011 . Retrieved January 29 2012 . McAvennie Mike January 17 2007. Happy Birthday to The Greatest . WWE.com. Archived from the original on February 25 2009 . Retrieved February 16 2009 . a b Muhammad Ali Handed Humanitarian Honour . Sky News . September 14 2012. Archived from the original on May 13 2018 . Retrieved May 12 2018 . Muhammad Ali . Biography.com . January 18 2018. Archived from the original on May 13 2018 . Retrieved May 12 2018 . a b Christopher Paul J.; Smith Alicia Marie 2006. Greatest Sports Heroes of All Times: North American Edition . Encouragement Press LLC. p. 20. ISBN 978-1-933766-09-6 . Archived from the original on October 31 2023 . Retrieved July 24 2023 . In pictures: Muhammad Alis love affair with Africa . BBC News . June 9 2016. Archived from the original on April 5 2018 . Retrieved June 22 2018 . a b Zirin Dave June 8 2016. Andrew Cuomo Would Have Blacklisted Muhammad Ali . The Nation . Archived from the original on August 28 2016 . Retrieved September 4 2016 . Zidan Karim November 21 2023. We can all learn from Muhammad Alis solidarity with Palestine . Sports Politika . Archived from the original on February 17 2024 . Retrieved February 25 2024 . Muhammad Ali We Still Love You: Unsteady Dreams of a Muslim International . The New Inquiry . June 19 2016. Archived from the original on January 21 2022 . Retrieved January 21 2022 . Rahman Mizan June 6 2016. Muhammad Alis forgotten land in Bangladesh . Gulf Times . Archived from the original on September 12 2016 . Retrieved September 4 2016 . Muhammad Ali We Still Love You: Unsteady Dreams of a Muslim International . The New Inquiry . June 19 2016. Archived from the original on January 21 2022 . Retrieved January 21 2022 . Schilling Vincent June 4 2016. The Greatest Muhammad Ali Walks On . Indian Country Today Media Network . Archived from the original on August 21 2016 . Retrieved September 4 2016 . Fuqua Antoine director 2019. Whats My Name: Muhammad Ali : Part II Motion picture. HBO. Hauser 2004 p. 397 Ezra Michael June 5 2016. Muhammad Alis Strange Failed Diplomatic Career . Politico Magazine . Archived from the original on April 1 2019 . Retrieved October 31 2023 . Cuddihy Martin June 9 2016. Muhammad Ali: Africa remembers the boxing legend . ABC News Australia . Archived from the original on September 5 2016 . Retrieved September 4 2016 . Levin Josh June 4 2016. The Time Muhammad Ali Stopped a Man From Leaping to His Death . Slate . Archived from the original on June 4 2016 . Retrieved June 4 2016 . Ali Talks Would-Be Jumper Off Ninth-Floor Fire Escape . The Blade Associated Press. January 20 1981. Archived from the original on August 28 2021 . Retrieved September 7 2020 . Campaign Notes: Muhammad Ali Switches His Support to Reagan . The New York Times . United Press International . October 3 1984. Archived from the original on September 14 2016 . Retrieved September 4 2016 . Muhammad Ali Steps into Ring . Jewish Telegraphic Agency . June 28 1985. Archived from the original on September 14 2016 . Retrieved September 4 2016 . a b Muhammad Ali 2012 Liberty Medal Ceremony . National Constitution Center . Archived from the original on January 18 2018 . Retrieved January 17 2018 . Khaled Ali June 4 2016. How Muhammad Ali became a sporting hero to the Arab world . Al Arabiya . Archived from the original on September 17 2016 . Retrieved September 4 2016 . Bresnahan John June 10 2016. Muhammad Ali and Orrin Hatch: An unlikely friendship . Politico . Archived from the original on July 17 2020 . Retrieved June 24 2020 . Shenon Philip November 27 1990. MIDEAST TENSIONS; At Baghdads Bazaar Everyone Wants Hostages . The New York Times . Archived from the original on June 24 2021 . Retrieved June 19 2021 . Brian Becker June 10 2016. I was with Muhammad Ali on his hostage-release trip to Iraq and the media has it all wrong . ANSWER Coalition. Archived from the original on July 2 2018 . Retrieved July 1 2018 . Hauser Thomas June 17 2016. Muhammad Ali: They Look Like Theyre Happy Together . HuffPost . Archived from the original on October 1 2020 . Retrieved September 21 2020 . UN Messenger of Peace Muhammad Ali arrives in Afghanistan . UN News Centre. December 13 2002. Archived from the original on December 13 2002 . Retrieved January 29 2012 . Muhammad Ali visits Kabul . Getty Images. Archived from the original on March 16 2010 . Retrieved May 20 2008 . McDonald Brian August 12 2009. Fightin talk as Ennis awaits Muhammed Ali sic . Irish Independent . Archived from the original on August 15 2009 . Retrieved August 26 2009 . Wilson Stan July 28 2012. Muhammad Ali returns to the Olympic stage once again in London . CNN . Archived from the original on July 29 2012 . Retrieved July 29 2012 . Corporal Spinks youre the greatest! . The Age . February 17 1978. Archived from the original on January 15 2024 . Retrieved January 15 2024 via Newspapers.com . a b c Muhammad Alis Finances A Puzzle To News Media; Im Broke He Quips . Jet . Vol. 54 no. 4. April 13 1978. p. 53. Archived from the original on October 31 2023 . Retrieved July 24 2023 . a b His Lifestyle His Ex-Wives His Expensive Entourage: They Explain Why Ali Took An 8 Million Beating . People . October 20 1980. Archived from the original on May 12 2018 . Retrieved May 12 2018 . Burkeman Oliver April 13 2006. Ali the Greatest sells his name and image for 50m . The Guardian . Archived from the original on May 11 2018 . Retrieved May 11 2018 . Muhammad Ali The Top 100 Celebrities . Forbes Celebrity 100 . 2006. Archived from the original on May 12 2018 . Retrieved May 10 2018 . Muhammad Alis Name Likely to Rake in the Cash for Years to Come . NBC News . June 7 2016. Archived from the original on May 11 2018 . Retrieved May 11 2018 . Alis words speak for themselves . The Guardian . January 17 2002. Archived from the original on October 21 2021 . Retrieved October 20 2021 . MuhammadAli December 17 2019. Im blessed and thankful to God that I understand hes trying me. This is a trial from God. He gave me this illness to remind me that I am not number one; He is. MuhammadAli reflecting on having Parkinsons disease. . Giving Strength Blessed God Tweet . Archived from the original on October 20 2021 . Retrieved October 20 2021 via Twitter . 60 Million Watch America: A Tribute to Heroes . ABC News . September 23 2001. Archived from the original on January 18 2018 . Retrieved January 17 2018 . Bulman May June 5 2016. Muhammad Ali dead: Michael J Fox pays tribute to fellow Parkinsons sufferer and their common fight . The Independent . Archived from the original on September 14 2016 . Retrieved September 4 2016 . Chasmar Jessica February 3 2013. Brother: Muhammad Ali could be dead in days . The Washington Times . Archived from the original on September 5 2016 . Retrieved September 4 2016 . Muhammad Alis daughter: Father watching Super Bowl not near death . CBS News . February 5 2013. Archived from the original on November 3 2013 . Retrieved September 4 2016 . Muhammad Ali hospitalized with pneumonia . The Journal . Associated Press. Archived from the original on December 21 2014 . Retrieved December 21 2014 . Bucktin Christopher January 16 2015. Boxing legend Muhammad Ali in hospital after being found unresponsive at his home . The Mirror . Archived from the original on January 16 2015 . Retrieved January 16 2015 . Ali out of hospital in time for 73rd birthday . MSN. Archived from the original on January 20 2015 . Retrieved January 17 2015 . Martin Jill June 2 2016. Muhammad Ali hospitalized with respiratory issue . CNN . Archived from the original on December 26 2018 . Retrieved June 3 2016 . Muhammad Ali Dies: The Greatest Boxer Dead at 74 . ABC News . June 4 2016. Archived from the original on June 5 2016 . Retrieved June 6 2016 . Lipsyte Robert June 3 2016. Muhammad Ali Dies at 74: Titan of Boxing and the 20th Century . The New York Times . Archived from the original on February 22 2020 . Retrieved June 3 2016 . Schuppe Jon June 4 2016. Muhammad Ali Died of Septic Shock Will Be Honored at Public Funeral: Spokesman . NBC News . Archived from the original on June 6 2016 . Retrieved June 6 2016 . a b Ali: Citizen of the world . Columbian . June 6 2016. Archived from the original on June 6 2016 . Retrieved June 6 2016 . Emery Debbie June 4 2016. UFC 199 Invades LA Forum Honors Boxing Legend Muhammad Ali . The Wrap . Archived from the original on August 5 2020 . Retrieved January 16 2020 . Muhammad Ali Memorial Service . C-SPAN . June 10 2016. Archived from the original on August 16 2016 . Retrieved September 9 2016 . Schreiner Bruce; Galofaro Claire June 7 2016. Will Smith Lennox Lewis among pallbearers for Muhammad Ali who scripted his own funeral in final days . National Post . Archived from the original on October 31 2023 . Retrieved July 31 2016 . President Erdogan Attends Muhammad Alis Funeral . www.tccb.gov.tr . No. Presidency of the Republic of Turkey. June 9 2016. Archived from the original on October 31 2023 . Retrieved September 14 2022 . Muhammad Ali To Be Buried In Louisville Friday . WFPL . June 4 2016. Archived from the original on June 5 2016 . Retrieved June 5 2016 . Muhammad Alis funeral to be watched worldwide by billions . India.com. June 5 2016. Archived from the original on June 9 2016 . Retrieved June 5 2016 . Muhammad Ali Islamic Funeral Prayer Service Jenazah scheduled at Freedom Hall . WHAS-TV . June 6 2016. Archived from the original on June 9 2016 . Retrieved June 9 2016 . In Their Own Words: Eulogies for Muhammad Ali . The New York Times . June 10 2016. Archived from the original on February 20 2023 . Retrieved October 23 2023 . Litman Laken June 10 2016. Will Smith Mike Tyson among those serving as pallbearers at Muhammad Alis funeral . USA Today . Archived from the original on August 18 2016 . Retrieved July 31 2016 . Bob Dylan on Muhammad Ali: The Most Excellent of Men . Rolling Stone . Archived from the original on May 18 2022 . Retrieved April 23 2022 . Sports Personality facts and figures . BBC. October 9 2008. Archived from the original on December 17 2008 . Retrieved February 1 2023 . Muhammad Ali . International Boxing Hall of Fame . Archived from the original on October 17 2018 . Retrieved December 9 2023 . : 80 in Ukrainian. Fakty i Kommentarii . January 17 2022. Archived from the original on April 30 2022 . Retrieved April 30 2022 . : . isport.ua in Russian. December 27 2020. Archived from the original on March 11 2021 . Retrieved February 21 2021 . Muhammad Ali in his own words . Reuters . June 4 2016. Archived from the original on October 5 2023 . Retrieved September 17 2023 . Muhammad Ali press conference 1974 . YouTube . September 26 2012. Archived from the original on February 3 2014 . Retrieved November 5 2013 . Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : Muhammad Ali Pre Liston Poetry Highlights . YouTube. February 12 2011 . Retrieved November 5 2013 . Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : Muhammad Ali Famous Interview After Defeating Foreman . YouTube . January 6 2010 . Retrieved November 5 2013 . Muhammad Alis influence ran deep through raps golden age . The Guardian . June 6 2016. Archived from the original on May 15 2018 . Retrieved May 15 2018 . Berry Ben June 9 2016. The 10 Best Muhammad Ali References In Hip Hop . The Source . Archived from the original on April 19 2019 . Retrieved April 19 2019 . Muhammad Ali: The original rapper Legendary emcee Chuck D of Public Enemy talks Alis impact on hip-hop . Andscape . June 9 2016. Archived from the original on July 2 2022 . Retrieved September 4 2016 . a b Jay Z Eminem and more hip-hop luminaries remember Muhammad Ali . CBS News . June 9 2016. Archived from the original on August 12 2016 . Retrieved September 4 2016 . Aubespin Mervin September 22 1978. Louisville lets Ali know its in his corner . The Courier-Journal . pp. 1 3 . Retrieved December 9 2023 via newspapers.com . Mayor signs law naming street for Ali . The Courier-Journal . November 29 1978. p. A2 . Retrieved December 9 2023 via newspapers.com . a b Hill Bob November 19 2005. Ali stirs conflicting emotions in hometown . The Courier-Journal . p. K5 . Retrieved December 9 2023 via newspapers.com . Kaukas Dick September 30 1978. A decision goes against Muhammad Ali . The Courier-Journal . p. 9 . Retrieved December 9 2023 via newspapers.com . a b Coomes Mark November 20 2005. The Greatest; Party lifts curtain on a shining tribute to Ali . The Courier-Journal . p. A8 . Retrieved December 9 2023 via newspapers.com . Shafer Sheldon S. November 19 2005. Center will revolve around ideas; Memorabilia just part of mission . The Courier-Journal . p. K2 . Retrieved December 9 2023 via newspapers.com . Exhibits Events . alicenter.org . February 17 2023 . Retrieved December 9 2023 . a b Mayor Fischer celebrates decision to rename Louisville airport to honor Muhammad Ali PDF Press release. Louisville Metro Government and Louisville Regional Airport Authority. January 16 2019. Archived from the original PDF on January 22 2019 . Retrieved May 12 2024 . Ladd Sarah June 7 2019. Louisvilles renamed Muhammad Ali International Airport debuts logo . usatoday.com . Louisville Courier Journal. Archived from the original on April 19 2021 . Retrieved June 7 2019 . Vaughn Jack; Lee Mike eds. 1986. The Legendary Bruce Lee . Black Belt Communications . p. 127. ISBN 978-0-89750-106-4 . Ali Mall: First Ever Shopping Mall Makes A Comeback . Araneta Center . Archived from the original on September 2 2016 . Retrieved September 4 2016 . Gross Josh 2016. Ali vs. Inoki: The Forgotten Fight That Inspired Mixed Martial Arts and Launched Sports Entertainment . BenBella Books . ISBN 978-1-942952-19-0 . What role did boxer Muhammad Ali play in early MMA? Let Ali vs. Inoki author Josh Gross explain . MMAjunkie . June 13 2016 . Retrieved September 4 2016 . Grant T. P. May 2 2013. MMA Origins: Fighting For Pride . BloodyElbow . Retrieved September 4 2016 . Czachor Emily Mae July 13 2017. Celebrating 25 years the ESPYs have become more than a sports awards show . Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on October 14 2017 . Retrieved September 10 2023 . President Clinton Awards the Presidential Citizens Medals . Today at The White House . National Archives and Records Administration. January 8 2001. Archived from the original on August 1 2012 . Retrieved June 5 2016 . Presidential Medal of Freedom Recipients . White House Press Secretary. November 3 2005. Archived from the original on March 6 2008 . Retrieved May 20 2008 . Bush presents Ali with Presidential Medal of Freedom . ESPN . November 14 2005 . Retrieved February 16 2009 . Briefs: Ali to receive Otto Hahn Medal today in Berlin . The Seattle Times . December 17 2005 . Retrieved June 5 2016 . Raimondi Marc June 12 2016. Click Debate: Whats all this talk about the Ali Act coming to MMA? . MMAjunkie . Retrieved September 4 2016 . Klimas Jacqueline June 7 2016. Rand Pauls amendment to knock out the draft named after Muhammad Ali . Washington Examiner . Retrieved September 4 2016 . Ryan Joe June 5 2007. Boxing legend Ali gets Princeton degree . The Star-Ledger . Retrieved June 5 2007 . SI dedicates Sportsman Legacy Award to Ali . Sports Illustrated . September 25 2015 . Retrieved September 16 2024 . Muhammad Ali Challenge To Do Great Things Will Be Honored At Voice Arts Awards Gala . Voice-Over Xtra! . August 12 2016 . Retrieved June 21 2023 . Winners and Nominees . Society of Voice Arts and Sciences . Retrieved June 21 2023 . H.R. 579 115th: Muhammad Ali Commemorative Coin Act . Govtrack . Retrieved May 1 2022 . Walker Hubert January 23 2017. Boxing Legend Muhammad Ali Commemorative Coin Bill Introduced . CoinWeek . Retrieved February 2 2020 . Muhammad Ali . ESPN . January 20 2012 . Retrieved January 29 2012 . a b Donelson Tom July 14 2008. Was Ali the Greatest Heavyweight? . Boxinginsider.com . Retrieved September 4 2016 . a b AP Fighters of the Century list . Retrieved February 12 2012 . Sports Illustrated honors worlds greatest athletes . CNN . December 3 1999. Archived from the original on August 19 2011 . Retrieved June 5 2016 . Ali crowned Sportsman of Century . BBC Sport . December 13 1999 . Retrieved June 6 2016 . Spears Marc J. September 14 1999. Ali: The Greatest of 20th century; Show stops when the champ arrives for awards dinner . The Courier-Journal . Wilstein Steve Associated Press Retton Hammill most popular American athletes in United States: poll ; The Daily Gazette May 17 1993. Quittner Joshua June 14 1999. Ali Time 100 People of the Century . Time . Archived from the original on February 11 2001. TIME 100 Persons of The Century . Time . Archived from the original on December 20 2022 . Retrieved September 10 2023 . Lassiter Jim June 29 1979. Jones Decision to Fight May Be Too Tall an Order . The Daily Oklahoman . Retrieved November 3 2023 via newspapers.com . The Most Famous Person Ever . Voice of America . June 6 2016. Muhammad Ali Covers . Sports Illustrated Vault . Sports Illustrated. Archived from the original on February 11 2020 . Retrieved December 22 2019 . Beslic Stephen November 17 2022. On this date: Michael Jordan appeared on the cover of Sports Illustrated for the fourth time . FanNation . Sports Illustrated . Retrieved November 3 2023 . Reilly Katie June 4 2016. Behind TIMEs New Muhammad Ali Cover . Time . Retrieved November 3 2023 . Aliwho has been featured on the cover of TIME four times before this timefirst appeared on the cover in the issue published March 22 1963 when his name was still Cassius Clay. Rovell Darren December 31 2015. Michael Jordan remains top-ranked athlete in history by Harris Poll . ESPN . Retrieved November 3 2023 . Smith Amy June 9 2016. Meet the London busker who worked as Muhammad Alis personal musician . Time Out . Retrieved June 12 2016 . Michel January 4 2014. Experience: Muhammad Ali was my mentor . The Guardian . Retrieved June 11 2016 . Anthony Andrew June 4 2016. A special relationship: how the British took Ali to their hearts . The Guardian . Retrieved November 3 2023 . 10 things you never knew about Diffrent Strokes . MeTV . February 6 2018. Allison Scott T.; Messick David M.; Goethals George R. 1989. On Being Better but not Smarter than Others: The Muhammad Ali Effect . Social Cognition . 7 3: 275295. doi : 10.1521soco.1989.7.3.275 . Van Lange P. A. M. December 1 1991. Being Better but Not Smarter than Others: The Muhammad Ali Effect at Work in Interpersonal Situations PDF . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin . 17 6: 689693. doi : 10.11770146167291176012 . S2CID 146176950 . Archived from the original PDF on February 18 2020. When We Were Kings 1996 . IMDb . Ali 2001 . IMDb . Film Will Smith peaks as Ali . BBC News . December 25 2001 . Retrieved December 5 2010 . Hollywood Walk of Fame database . HWOF.com. Archived from the original on July 1 2010. Christian Margena A. April 16 2007. How Do You Really Get A Star On The Hollywood Walk Of Fame? . Jet . Vol. 111 no. 15. pp. 25 29 . Retrieved October 12 2010 via Google Books. A Star for the Greatest . Jet . Vol. 101 no. 6. January 28 2002. p. 52 . Retrieved September 22 2010 via Google Books. Geoff Pevere Chuvalos finest hour packs a punch . Toronto Star October 31 2003. The Trials of Muhammad Ali . Kartemquin Educational Films. Archived from the original on June 4 2016 . Retrieved August 26 2013 . Muhammad Ali . Ken Burns . Retrieved September 2 2020 . Acevedo Yoselin March 29 2017. Ken Burns Next Documentary Will Profile Muhammad Ali . IndieWire . Retrieved September 27 2020 . Zirin Dave EdgeofSports August 4 2020. OK just finished watching the eight hour rough cut of Ken Burns forthcoming documentary about Muhammad Ali. It is utterly outstanding. Not sure when it will be released but the footage they found will blow minds and the great Ali will come alive for a new generation. https:t.coKnizgnK07H Tweet . Retrieved December 31 2020 via Twitter . Adams Kirby July 13 2023. Musical based off life of Muhammad Ali with music by Teddy Abrams is Broadway bound . Courier Journal . Retrieved December 3 2023 . Bamigboye Baz April 18 2023. Ali Musical Heads To Boxing Icons Louisville Birthplace For Pre-Broadway World Premiere . Deadline . Retrieved December 3 2023 . Putnam Leah April 18 2023. World Premiere Ali Musical to Debut in Muhammad Alis Hometown of Louisville Kentucky . Playbill . Retrieved December 3 2023 . Horowitz Steven J. October 25 2023. Q-Tip Joins Muhammad Ali Musical Ali as Music Producer and Co-Lyricist . Variety . Retrieved December 3 2023 . Jones Chris July 10 2024. Ali will premiere in Chicago a Broadway-bound musical about Muhammad Ali . Chicago Tribune . Retrieved September 26 2024 . ESPN Classic Muhammad Alis ring record . espn.com . Retrieved July 6 2021 . Further reading Hauser Thomas 2004. Muhammad Ali: His Life and Times . London: Robson Books. ISBN 978-1-86105-738-9 . OCLC 56645513 . Online Muhammad Ali: American boxer in Encyclopdia Britannica Online by Thomas Hauser Adam Augustyn Piyush Bhathya Yamini Chauhan John M. Cunningham Richard Pallardy Michael Ray Emily Rodriguez Surabhi Sinha Amy Tikkanen Grace Young and The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica External links Wikiquote has quotations related to Muhammad Ali . Wikimedia Commons has media related to Muhammad Ali . Official website November 2018 archive Boxing record for Muhammad Ali from BoxRec registration required Muhammad Ali at IMDb William Addams Reitwiesner Genealogical Services: Ancestry of Muhammad Ali FBI Records: The Vault Muhammad Ali at the FBI Cassius Clay Guilty 1967 Texas Archive of the Moving Image Muhammad Ali at the Team USA Hall of Fame archive April 6 2023 Muhammad Ali at Olympics.com Muhammad Ali at Olympedia Photo essays Cassius Clay: Before He Was Ali . Life . Archived from the original on October 21 2009. Berman Eliza; Ronk Liz June 4 2016. Muhammad Alis Life in Photos; From his time in the ring to his more playful side . Life . Archived from the original on June 4 2016. Olympic Games Preceded by Haakon Magnus Crown Prince of Norway Final Olympic torchbearer Atlanta 1996 Succeeded by Midori Ito Preceded by Antonio Rebollo Final Summer Olympic torchbearer Atlanta 1996 Succeeded by Cathy Freeman v t e Muhammad Ali Fights Boxing at the 1960 Summer Olympics Clay vs. Hunsaker Clay vs. Siler Clay vs. Esperti Clay vs. Robinson Clay vs. Fleeman Clay vs. Clark Clay vs. Sabedong Clay vs. Johnson Clay vs. Miteff Clay vs. Besmanoff Clay vs. Banks Clay vs. Warner Clay vs. Logan Clay vs. Daniels Clay vs. Lavorante Moore vs. Clay Clay vs. Powell Clay vs. Jones Clay vs. Cooper Liston vs. Clay Ali vs. Liston II Ali vs. Patterson Ali vs. Chuvalo Ali vs. Cooper II Ali vs. London Ali vs. Mildenberger Ali vs. Williams Ali vs. Terrell Ali vs. Folley Ali vs. Quarry Ali vs. Bonavena Fight of the Century Frazier vs. Ali I Ali vs. Ellis Ali vs. Mathis Ali vs. Blin Ali vs. M. Foster Ali vs. Chuvalo II Ali vs. Quarry II Ali vs. Lewis Ali vs. Patterson II Ali vs. B. Foster Ali vs. Bugner Ali vs. Norton Norton vs. Ali II Ali vs. Lubbers Ali vs. Frazier II The Rumble in the Jungle Foreman vs. Ali Ali vs. Wepner Ali vs. Lyle Ali vs. Bugner II Thrilla in Manila Ali vs. Frazier III Ali vs. Coopman Ali vs. Young Ali vs. Dunn Ali vs. Norton III Ali vs. Evangelista Ali vs. Shavers Ali vs. Spinks Spinks vs. Ali II Holmes vs. Ali Ali vs. Berbick Media Books The Greatest: My Own Story 1975 autobiography The Fight 1975 Muhammad Ali: His Life and Times 1991 biography The Tao of Muhammad Ali 1997 King of the World 1998 biography Facing Ali 2002 Muhammad Ali: The Glory Years 2002 biography The Soul of a Butterfly 2004 autobiography Twelve Rounds to Glory 2007 biography Ali: A Life 2018 biography Documentaries Whickers World 1967 episode a.k.a. Cassius Clay 1970 When We Were Kings 1996 The Last Round: Chuvalo vs. Ali 2003 Facing Ali 2009 When Ali Came to Ireland 2012 The Trials of Muhammad Ali 2013 I Am Ali 2014 Icons: The Greatest Person of the 20th Century 2019 episode Whats My Name: Muhammad Ali 2019 Blood Brothers: Malcolm X Muhammad Ali 2021 Muhammad Ali 2021 series Other films and series Requiem for a Heavyweight 1962 The Super Fight 1970 The Greatest 1977 I Am the Greatest: The Adventures of Muhammad Ali 1977 animated series King of the World 2000 TV film Ali: An American Hero 2000 TV film Ali 2001 Muhammad Alis Greatest Fight 2013 TV film One Night in Miami... 2020 Music and performance I Am the Greatest 1963 album Black Superman Muhammad Ali 1974 song The Adventures of Ali and His Gang vs. Mr. Tooth Decay 1976 album Muhammad Ali 2001 song The Worlds Greatest 2002 song Approaching Ali 2013 opera One Night in Miami 2013 play Comics and video games Superman vs. Muhammad Ali 1978 comic book Muhammad Ali Heavyweight Boxing 1992 video game Foes of Ali 1995 video game Family Cassius Marcellus Clay Sr. father Odessa Grady Clay mother Rahaman Ali brother Khalilah Ali wife Laila Ali daughter Nico Ali Walsh grandson Team and associates Chuck Bodak trainer cutman Angelo Dundee cornerman Drew Bundini Brown trainer cornerman Ferdie Pacheco personal physician cornerman Joe E. Martin first trainer Archie Moore trainer George Dillman instructor Jabir Herbert Muhammad manager Luis Sarria trainer cutman masseur Joe Frazier opponent friend Richard Durham autobiography co-writer Memorials Ali Mall Muhammad Ali Boulevard Muhammad Ali Center Louisville Muhammad Ali International Airport Related Clay v. United States Muhammad Ali vs. Antonio Inoki Muhammad Ali Boxing Reform Act Muhammad Ali in China Muhammad Ali in India Religious views of Muhammad Ali Rope-a-dope Category Awards for Muhammad Ali v t e Olympic boxing champions mens light heavyweight 19201936: 160175 lb 72.679.4 kg 1948: 7380 kg 19522012: 7581 kg 20162020: 7681 kg 1920 : Eddie Eagan USA 1924 : Harry Mitchell GBR 1928 : Victor Avendano ARG 1932 : David Carstens RSA 1936 : Roger Michelot FRA 1948 : George Hunter RSA 1952 : Norvel Lee USA 1956 : Jim Boyd USA 1960 : Cassius Clay USA 1964 : Cosimo Pinto ITA 1968 : Danas Pozniakas URS 1972 : Mate Parlov YUG 1976 : Leon Spinks USA 1980 : Slobodan Kacar YUG 1984 : Anton Josipovic YUG 1988 : Andrew Maynard USA 1992 : Torsten May GER 1996 : Vassiliy Jirov KAZ 2000 : Aleksandr Lebziak RUS 2004 : Andre Ward USA 2008 : Zhang Xiaoping CHN 2012 : Egor Mekhontsev RUS 2016 : Julio Cesar La Cruz CUB 2020 : Arlen Lopez CUB v t e BBC Sports Personality World Sport Star of the Year 1960: Herb Elliott 1961: Valeriy Brumel 1962: Donald Jackson 1963: Jacques Anquetil 1964: Abebe Bikila 1965: Ron Clarke Gary Player 1966: Eusebio Garfield Sobers 1967: George Moore 1968: Ludmila Belousova Oleg Protopopov 1969: Rod Laver 1970: Pele 1971: Lee Trevino 1972: Olga Korbut 1973: Muhammad Ali 1974: Muhammad Ali 1975: Arthur Ashe 1976: Nadia Comaneci 1977: Niki Lauda 1978: Muhammad Ali 1979: Bjorn Borg 1980: Jack Nicklaus 1981: Chris Evert 1982: Jimmy Connors 1983: Carl Lewis 1984: Seve Ballesteros 1985: Boris Becker 1986: Greg Norman 1987: Martina Navratilova 1988: Steffi Graf 1989: Mike Tyson 1990: Mal Meninga 1991: Mike Powell 1992: Andre Agassi 1993: Greg Norman 1994: Brian Lara 1995: Jonah Lomu 1996: Evander Holyfield Michael Johnson 1997: Martina Hingis 1998: Mark OMeara 1999: Maurice Greene 2000: Tiger Woods 2001: Goran Ivanisevic 2002: Ronaldo 2003: Lance Armstrong 2004: Roger Federer 2005: Shane Warne 2006: Roger Federer 2007: Roger Federer 2008: Usain Bolt 2009: Usain Bolt 2010: Rafael Nadal 2011: Novak Djokovic 2012: Usain Bolt 2013: Sebastian Vettel 2014: Cristiano Ronaldo 2015: Dan Carter 2016: Simone Biles 2017: Roger Federer 2018: Francesco Molinari 2019: Eliud Kipchoge 2020: Khabib Nurmagomedov 2021: Rachael Blackmore 2022: Lionel Messi 2023: Erling Haaland v t e NAACP Image Award Presidents Award 1980s Ella Fitzgerald 1986 Rev. Jesse Jackson 1987 Jheryl Busby 1988 Antoinette Stroman Ryan White 1989 1990s Kent Amos Carmen Amos 1995 Bryant Gumbel 1996 Alexis Herman 1997 Lauryn Hill 1998 Tavis Smiley Tom Joyner 1999 2000s Bill Clinton 2000 Condoleezza Rice 2001 Venus Serena Williams 2002 T. D. Jakes 2003 Susan L. Taylor 2005 Soledad OBrien 2006 Ruby Dee 2007 Muhammad Ali 2008 Van Jones 2009 2010s Colin Powell 2010 Black Stuntmens Association 2011 Kerry Washington 2012 Spike Lee 2014 John Legend 2015 Lonnie Bunch 2016 Danny Glover 2017 Jay-Z 2018 Rihanna 2019 2020s LeBron James 2020 Prince Harry Duke of Sussex Meghan Duchess of Sussex 2021 Gabrielle Union Dwyane Wade 2022 Usher 2023 v t e Arthur Ashe Courage Award winners Named after Arthur Ashe 1993: Valvano 1994: Palermo 1995: Cosell 1996: Claiborne 1997: Ali 1998: D. Smith 1999: King 2000: Sanders 2001: Freeman 2002: Flight 93 passengers Beamer Bingham Burnett Glick 2003: P. Tillman K. Tillman 2004: Weah 2005: MacLaren Yeboah 2006: Ahmad Kohestani 2007: Cullen Ringland 2008: Carlos T. Smith 2009: Mandela 2010: Thomas 2011: Bozella 2012: Summitt 2013: Roberts 2014: Sam 2015: Jenner 2016: Dobson 2017: Shriver 2018: USA Gymnastics sex abuse scandal survivors; ibnlt : Biles Dantzscher Denhollander Douglas Maroney Nichols Raisman Wieber 2019: Russell 2020: Love 2021: Moore 2022: Klitschko 2023: USWNST 2024: Gleason v t e Time 100: The Most Important People of the 20th Century Leaders revolutionaries David Ben-Gurion Winston Churchill Mahatma Gandhi Mikhail Gorbachev Adolf Hitler Ho Chi Minh Pope John Paul II Ruhollah Khomeini Martin Luther King Jr. Vladimir Lenin Nelson Mandela Mao Zedong Ronald Reagan Eleanor Roosevelt Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Margaret Sanger Margaret Thatcher Unknown Tiananmen Square rebel Lech Waesa Artists entertainers Louis Armstrong Lucille Ball The Beatles Marlon Brando Coco Chanel Charlie Chaplin Le Corbusier Bob Dylan T. S. Eliot Aretha Franklin Martha Graham Jim Henson James Joyce Pablo Picasso Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein Bart Simpson Frank Sinatra Steven Spielberg Igor Stravinsky Oprah Winfrey Builders titans Stephen Bechtel Sr. Leo Burnett Willis Carrier Walt Disney Henry Ford Bill Gates Amadeo Giannini Ray Kroc Estee Lauder William Levitt Lucky Luciano Louis B. Mayer Charles E. Merrill Akio Morita Walter Reuther Pete Rozelle David Sarnoff Juan Trippe Sam Walton Thomas J. Watson Jr. Scientists thinkers Leo Baekeland Tim Berners-Lee Rachel Carson Albert Einstein Philo Farnsworth Enrico Fermi Alexander Fleming Sigmund Freud Robert H. Goddard Kurt Godel Edwin Hubble John Maynard Keynes Leakey family Jean Piaget Jonas Salk William Shockley Alan Turing Francis Crick James Watson Ludwig Wittgenstein Wright brothers Heroes icons Muhammad Ali The American G.I. Lady Diana Spencer Anne Frank Billy Graham Che Guevara Edmund Hillary Tenzing Norgay Helen Keller Kennedy family Bruce Lee Charles Lindbergh Harvey Milk Marilyn Monroe Emmeline Pankhurst Rosa Parks Pele Jackie Robinson Andrei Sakharov Mother Teresa Bill W. v t e Hickok Belt winners 19501976 1950: Phil Rizzuto 1951: Allie Reynolds 1952: Rocky Marciano 1953: Ben Hogan 1954: Willie Mays 1955: Otto Graham 1956: Mickey Mantle 1957: Carmen Basilio 1958: Bob Turley 1959: Ingemar Johansson 1960: Arnold Palmer 1961: Roger Maris 1962: Maury Wills 1963: Sandy Koufax 1964: Jim Brown 1965: Sandy Koufax 1966: Frank Robinson 1967: Carl Yastrzemski 1968: Joe Namath 1969: Tom Seaver 1970: Brooks Robinson 1971: Lee Trevino 1972: Steve Carlton 1973: O. J. Simpson 1974: Muhammad Ali 1975: Pete Rose 1976: Ken Stabler 2012present 2012: LeBron James 2013: LeBron James 2014: Madison Bumgarner 2015: Stephen Curry 2016: Michael Phelps 2017: Jose Altuve 2018: Patrick Mahomes 2019: Kawhi Leonard 2020: Patrick Mahomes 2021: Shohei Ohtani 2022: Aaron Judge 2023: Nikola Jokic v t e WWE Hall of Fame inductees 1990s 1993 Andre the Giant 1994 Arnold Skaaland Bobo Brazil Buddy Rogers Chief Jay Strongbow Freddie Blassie Gorilla Monsoon James Dudley 1995 Antonino Rocca Ernie Ladd The Fabulous Moolah George Steele Ernie Roth Ivan Putski Pedro Morales 1996 Jimmy Snuka Johnny Rodz Killer Kowalski Lou Albano Mikel Scicluna Pat Patterson Valiant Brothers Jimmy Valiant Johnny Valiant Vince McMahon Sr. 2000s 2004 Big John Studd Superstar Billy Graham Bobby Heenan Don Muraco Greg Valentine Harley Race Jesse Ventura Junkyard Dog Sgt. Slaughter Tito Santana Celebrity Pete Rose 2005 Bob Orton Jr. Hulk Hogan The Iron Sheik Jimmy Hart Nikolai Volkoff Paul Orndorff Roddy Piper 2006 The Blackjacks Blackjack Mulligan Blackjack Lanza Bret Hart Eddie Guerrero Gene Okerlund Sherri Martel Tony Atlas Verne Gagne Celebrity William Perry 2007 Dusty Rhodes Jerry Lawler Jim Ross Mr. Fuji Curt Hennig Nick Bockwinkel The Sheik Wild Samoans Afa Anoai Sika Anoai 2008 The Brisco Brothers Gerald Brisco Jack Brisco Eddie Graham Gordon Solie Mae Young Peter Maivia Ric Flair See also: 2012 Rocky Johnson 2009 Bill Watts The Funk Brothers Terry Funk Dory Funk Jr. Howard Finkel Koko B. Ware Ricky Steamboat Stone Cold Steve Austin Von Erich family Chris Von Erich David Von Erich Fritz Von Erich Kerry Von Erich Kevin Von Erich Mike Von Erich 2010s 2010 Antonio Inoki Gorgeous George Maurice Vachon Stu Hart Ted DiBiase Wendi Richter Celebrity Bob Uecker 2011 Abdullah the Butcher Bob Armstrong Jim Duggan Road Warriors Road Warrior Hawk Road Warrior Animal Paul Ellering Shawn Michaels Sunny Celebrity Drew Carey 2012 Edge The Four Horsemen Arn Anderson Barry Windham J. J. Dillon Ric Flair Tully Blanchard Mil Mascaras Ron Simmons Yokozuna Celebrity Mike Tyson 2013 Bob Backlund Booker T Bruno Sammartino Mick Foley Trish Stratus Celebrity Donald Trump 2014 Carlos Colon Jake Roberts Lita Paul Bearer Scott Hall The Ultimate Warrior Celebrity Mr. T 2015 Alundra Blayze The Bushwhackers Bushwhacker Butch Bushwhacker Luke Kevin Nash Larry Zbyszko Randy Savage Rikishi Tatsumi Fujinami Celebrity Arnold Schwarzenegger Warrior Connor Michalek 2016 Big Boss Man Fabulous Freebirds Michael Hayes Buddy Roberts Jimmy Garvin Terry Gordy The Godfather Jacqueline Stan Hansen Sting Celebrity Snoop Dogg Warrior Joan Lunden Legacy Ed Lewis Frank Gotch George Hackenschmidt Lou Thesz Mildred Burke Pat OConnor Sailor Art Thomas 2017 Beth Phoenix Diamond Dallas Page Kurt Angle Rick Rude Rock n Roll Express Ricky Morton Robert Gibson Theodore Long Warrior Eric LeGrand Legacy Bearcat Wright Dr. Jerry Graham Haystacks Calhoun Judy Grable June Byers Luther Lindsay Martin Burns Rikidozan Toots Mondt 2018 Dudley Boyz Bubba Ray Dudley D-Von Dudley Goldberg Hillbilly Jim Ivory Jeff Jarrett Mark Henry Celebrity Kid Rock Warrior Jarrius JJ Robertson Legacy Boris Malenko Cora Combs Dara Singh Hiro Matsuda Jim Londos Lord Alfred Hayes Rufus R. Jones El Santo Sputnik Monroe Stan Stasiak 2019 Brutus Beefcake D-Generation X Shawn Michaels Triple H Chyna Road Dogg Billy Gunn Sean Waltman Harlem Heat Booker T Stevie Ray Hart Foundation Bret Hart Jim Neidhart The Honky Tonk Man Torrie Wilson Warrior Sue Aitchison Legacy Bruiser Brody Buddy Rose Hisashi Shinma Jim Barnett Joseph Cohen Luna Vachon Primo Carnera Professor Tanaka S. D. Jones Wahoo McDaniel 2020s 2020 The Bella Twins Nikki Bella Brie Bella Davey Boy Smith John Bradshaw Layfield Jushin Liger New World Order Hulk Hogan Kevin Nash Scott Hall Sean Waltman Celebrity William Shatner Warrior Titus ONeil Legacy Baron Michele Leone Brickhouse Brown Gary Hart Ray Stevens Steve Williams 2021 Eric Bischoff The Great Khali Kane Molly Holly Rob Van Dam Celebrity Ozzy Osbourne Warrior Rich Hering Legacy Buzz Sawyer Dick the Bruiser Ethel Johnson Paul Boesch Pez Whatley 2022 Sharmell Steiner Brothers Rick Steiner Scott Steiner The Undertaker Vader Warrior Shad Gaspard 2023 The Great Muta Rey Mysterio Stacy Keibler Celebrity Andy Kaufman Warrior Tim White 2024 Bull Nakano Paul Heyman Thunderbolt Patterson Lia Maivia U.S. Express Barry Windham Mike Rotunda Celebrity Muhammad Ali Category v t e City of Louisville and metro area History Timeline Historic places Founder: George Rogers Clark Corn Island Fort Nelson Bloody Monday religious riots 1855 Civil War Southern Exposition 188387 1890 tornado 1937 flood 1968 riots 1973 Kentucky Derby Secretariat 1974 tornadoes Louisville Cardinals mens basketball Championships in 1980 1986 2013 vacated 2015 scandal Standard Gravure shooting 1989 Ohio River Bridges Project 200216 Breonna Taylor Killing 2020 Protests 2023 bank shooting Geography Downtown Cityscape Climate Local landmarks Neighborhoods Parks Preservation districts Old Louisville Government Mayor Craig Greenberg Metro Council President : Markus Winkler Transportation Airports Muhammad Ali International Bowman Field Bridges Lewis and Clark Big Four Lincoln Kennedy Clark2nd St. 14th St. KI Sherman Minton Louisville Union Station McAlpine Locks and Dam Roads TARC Other subject areas Attractions and events Cuisine Economy Education Media People Performing arts Public art Religion Sports Top subjects Muhammad Ali Muhammad Ali Center Cave Hill Cemetery Falls of the Ohio Farmington Kentucky Derby Festival KFC History Colonel Sanders LN Louisville Slugger Speed Art Museum University of Louisville Cardinals National Historic Landmarks Belle of Louisville Churchill Downs Historic Locust Grove Mayor Andrew Broaddus Old Bank Zachary Taylor House United States Marine Hospital Water Tower Prominent suburbs over 10K pop. Clarksville Jeffersontown Jeffersonville Lyndon Mount Washington New Albany St. Matthews Shelbyville Shepherdsville Shively Category city Category metro area WikiProject Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat 2 National Germany United States France BnF data Japan 2 Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway 2 Latvia Chile Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz 2 Grammy Awards People Trove Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef NARA SNAC Te Papa New Zealand Retrieved from https:en.wikipedia.orgwindex.php?titleMuhammadAlioldid1249018566 Categories : Muhammad Ali 1942 births 2016 deaths 20th-century American rappers 20th-century Muslims 21st-century Muslims Activists for African-American civil rights American civil rights activists Activists from Kentucky African-American boxers African-American male rappers African-American poets African-American Sunni Muslims American antiVietnam War activists American conscientious objectors American former Protestants American male boxers American male poets American male rappers American Muslim activists American people of Irish descent American people of Malagasy descent American philanthropists American spoken word poets American Sufis American sportspeople in doping cases BBC Sports Personality World Sport Star of the Year winners Boxers at the 1960 Summer Olympics Boxers from Arizona Boxers from Chicago Boxers from Louisville Kentucky Boxers from New Jersey Burials at Cave Hill Cemetery Central High School Louisville Kentucky alumni COINTELPRO targets Columbia Records artists Converts to Islam from Christianity Deaths from sepsis in the United States Doping cases in boxing Former Nation of Islam members International Boxing Hall of Fame inductees Medalists at the 1960 Summer Olympics Muslims from Arizona Muslims from Kentucky Muslims from New Jersey Neurological disease deaths in Arizona Olympic boxers for the United States Olympic cauldron lighters Olympic gold medalists for the United States in boxing Overturned convictions in the United States People from Paradise Valley Arizona People with Parkinsons disease People with traumatic brain injuries Poets from Arizona Poets from Kentucky Poets from New Jersey Presidential Citizens Medal recipients Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients Professional wrestling referees Rappers from Kentucky Sportspeople from Cherry Hill New Jersey Sportspeople from the Phoenix metropolitan area Sportspeople with dyslexia The Ring magazine champions Vietnam War draft evaders Winners of the United States Championship for amateur boxers World Boxing Association champions World Boxing Council champions World heavyweight boxing champions Writers from Louisville Kentucky WWE Hall of Fame inductees Hidden categories: Pages with non-numeric formatnum arguments Pages with login required references or sources Pages with plain IPA Webarchive template wayback links Pages containing links to subscription-only content CS1 Ukrainian-language sources uk CS1 Russian-language sources ru Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use American English from March 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from September 2024 Articles with hCards Biography with signature Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from June 2016 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from December 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 Commons category link from Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 2 October 2024 at 18:58 UTC . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view