Nelson Mandela - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Donate Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 1 Early life Toggle Early life subsection 1.1 Childhood: 19181934 1.2 Clarkebury Healdtown and Fort Hare: 19341940 1.3 Arriving in Johannesburg: 19411943 2 Early revolutionary activity Toggle Early revolutionary activity subsection 2.1 Law studies and the ANC Youth League: 19431949 2.2 Defiance Campaign and Transvaal ANC Presidency: 19501954 2.3 Congress of the People and the Treason Trial: 19551961 2.4 MK the SACP and African tour: 196162 3 Imprisonment Toggle Imprisonment subsection 3.1 Arrest and Rivonia trial: 19621964 3.2 Robben Island: 19641982 3.3 Pollsmoor Prison: 19821988 3.4 Victor Verster Prison and release: 19881990 4 End of apartheid and elections Toggle End of apartheid and elections subsection 4.1 Early negotiations: 199091 4.2 CODESA talks: 199192 4.3 General election: 1994 5 Presidency of South Africa: 19941999 Toggle Presidency of South Africa: 19941999 subsection 5.1 National reconciliation 5.2 Domestic programmes 5.3 Foreign affairs 5.4 Withdrawing from politics 6 Post-presidency and final years Toggle Post-presidency and final years subsection 6.1 Continued activism and philanthropy: 19992004 6.2 Retiring from retirement : 20042013 6.3 Illness and death: 20112013 7 Political ideology Toggle Political ideology subsection 7.1 Democracy 7.2 Socialism and Marxism 8 Personality and personal life 9 Reception and legacy Toggle Reception and legacy subsection 9.1 Orders decorations monuments and honours 9.2 Biographies and popular media 10 See also 11 References Toggle References subsection 11.1 Footnotes 11.2 Bibliography 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Nelson Mandela 222 languages Aceh Afrikaans Alemannisch Anaraskiela nglisc Aragones Arpetan Asturianu Avanee Aymar aru Azrbaycanca Basa Bali Bamanankan Ban-lam-gu Bikol Central Bosanski Brezhoneg Catala Cebuano Cestina Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa ChiShona Corsu Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk Davvisamegiella Deitsch Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Emilian e rumagnol Espanol Esperanto Estremenu Euskara Eegbe Fiji Hindi Froyskt Francais Frysk Fulfulde Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gaidhlig Galego Goychi Konknni Gungbe Hak-ka-ngi Hausa Hawaii Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue IsiXhosa IsiZulu Islenska Italiano Jawa Kaby Kapampangan Kernowek Kiswahili Kotava Kreyol ayisyen Kriyol gwiyannen Kurdi Ladino Latina Latviesu Letzebuergesch Lietuviu Limburgs Lingala Livvinkarjala Luganda Lombard Magyar Malagasy Malti Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Naija Nederlands Napulitano Nordfriisk Norsk bokmal Norsk nynorsk Occitan Ozbekcha Papiamentu Patois Piemonteis Tok Pisin Plattduutsch Polski Portugues Qaraqalpaqsha Ripoarisch Romana Runa Simi Sardu Scots Sesotho sa Leboa Setswana Shqip Sicilianu Simple English SiSwati Slovencina Slovenscina Slunski Soomaaliga srpski Srpskohrvatski Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog Taqbaylit tatarca Tetun Thuja Tsetsehestahese Turkce Uyghurche Veneto Vepsan kel Tieng Viet Volapuk Voro Walon West-Vlams Winaray Xitsonga Yoruba Zazaki Zeeuws Zemaiteska Batak Mandailing Tolsi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia President of South Africa from 1994 to 1999 Mandela redirects here. Not to be confused with Mandala . For other uses see Mandela disambiguation and Nelson Mandela disambiguation . His Excellency Nelson Mandela OMP SBG SBS CLS DMG MMS MMB OM Mandela in October 1994 1st President of South Africa In office 10 May 1994 14 June 1999 Deputy Frederik Willem de Klerk 19941996 Thabo Mbeki 19941999 Preceded by Frederik Willem de Klerk as State President Succeeded by Thabo Mbeki 11th President of the African National Congress In office 7 July 1991 20 December 1997 Deputy Walter Sisulu 19911994 Thabo Mbeki 19941997 Preceded by Oliver Tambo Succeeded by Thabo Mbeki 2nd and 4th Deputy President of the African National Congress In office May 1985 7 July 1991 President Oliver Tambo Preceded by Oliver Tambo Succeeded by Walter Sisulu In office December 1952 1958 President Albert Luthuli Preceded by Walter Rubusana Succeeded by Oliver Tambo 19th Secretary-General of the Non-Aligned Movement In office 2 September 1998 14 June 1999 Preceded by Andres Pastrana Arango Succeeded by Thabo Mbeki Personal details Born Rolihlahla Mandela 1918-07-18 18 July 1918 Mvezo South Africa Died 5 December 2013 2013-12-05 aged 95 Johannesburg South Africa Resting place Mandela Graveyard Qunu Eastern Cape Political party African National Congress Other political affiliations South African Communist Party Tripartite Alliance Spouses Evelyn Ntoko Mase m. 1944 ; div. 1958 Winifred Madikizela m. 1958 ; div. 1996 Graca Simbine m. 1998 Children 6 including Makgatho Maki Zenani and Zindziswa Alma mater University of Fort Hare University of London University of South Africa Witwatersrand University Occupation Politician lawyer philanthropist activist Known for Anti-apartheid activism Awards Sakharov Prize 1988 Bharat Ratna 1990 Lenin Peace Prize 1990 Nishan-e-Pakistan 1992 Isitwalandwe Medal 1992 Nobel Peace Prize 1993 Presidential Medal of Freedom 2002 see list for more Signature Website Foundation Nicknames Madiba Tata Dalibunga Writing career Notable works Long Walk to Freedom Nelson Mandelas voice Mandela during his 1994 visit to the US Recorded on 4 October 1994 Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela m n d l man- DEH -l ; 1 Xhosa: xoliaa mandla ; born Rolihlahla Mandela ; 18 July 1918 5 December 2013 was a South African anti-apartheid activist and politician who served as the first president of South Africa from 1994 to 1999. He was the countrys first black head of state and the first elected in a fully representative democratic election. His government focused on dismantling the legacy of apartheid by fostering racial reconciliation . Ideologically an African nationalist and socialist he served as the president of the African National Congress ANC party from 1991 to 1997. A Xhosa Mandela was born into the Thembu royal family in Mvezo South Africa. He studied law at the University of Fort Hare and the University of Witwatersrand before working as a lawyer in Johannesburg . There he became involved in anti-colonial and African nationalist politics joining the ANC in 1943 and co-founding its Youth League in 1944. After the National Party s white-only government established apartheid a system of racial segregation that privileged whites Mandela and the ANC committed themselves to its overthrow. He was appointed president of the ANCs Transvaal branch rising to prominence for his involvement in the 1952 Defiance Campaign and the 1955 Congress of the People . He was repeatedly arrested for seditious activities and was unsuccessfully prosecuted in the 1956 Treason Trial . Influenced by Marxism he secretly joined the banned South African Communist Party SACP. Although initially committed to non-violent protest in association with the SACP he co-founded the militant uMkhonto we Sizwe in 1961 that led a sabotage campaign against the apartheid government. He was arrested and imprisoned in 1962 and following the Rivonia Trial was sentenced to life imprisonment for conspiring to overthrow the state. Mandela served 27 years in prison split between Robben Island Pollsmoor Prison and Victor Verster Prison . Amid growing domestic and international pressure and fears of racial civil war President F. W. de Klerk released him in 1990. Mandela and de Klerk led efforts to negotiate an end to apartheid which resulted in the 1994 multiracial general election in which Mandela led the ANC to victory and became president. Leading a broad coalition government which promulgated a new constitution Mandela emphasised reconciliation between the countrys racial groups and created the Truth and Reconciliation Commission to investigate past human rights abuses. Economically his administration retained its predecessors liberal framework despite his own socialist beliefs also introducing measures to encourage land reform combat poverty and expand healthcare services. Internationally Mandela acted as mediator in the Pan Am Flight 103 bombing trial and served as secretary-general of the Non-Aligned Movement from 1998 to 1999. He declined a second presidential term and was succeeded by his deputy Thabo Mbeki . Mandela became an elder statesman and focused on combating poverty and HIVAIDS through the charitable Nelson Mandela Foundation . Mandela was a controversial figure for much of his life. Although critics on the right denounced him as a communist terrorist and those on the far left deemed him too eager to negotiate and reconcile with apartheids supporters he gained international acclaim for his activism. Globally regarded as an icon of democracy and social justice he received more than 250 honours including the Nobel Peace Prize . He is held in deep respect within South Africa where he is often referred to by his Thembu clan name Madiba and described as the Father of the Nation . Early life Childhood: 19181934 Main article: Mandela family Mandela was born on 18 July 1918 in the village of Mvezo in Umtata then part of South Africas Cape Province . 2 He was given the forename Rolihlahla a a Xhosa term colloquially meaning troublemaker 5 and in later years became known by his clan name Madiba. 6 His patrilineal great-grandfather Ngubengcuka was ruler of the Thembu Kingdom in the Transkeian Territories of South Africas modern Eastern Cape province. 7 One of Ngubengcukas sons named Mandela was Nelsons grandfather and the source of his surname. 8 Because Mandela was the kings child by a wife of the Ixhiba clan a so-called Left-Hand House the descendants of his cadet branch of the royal family were morganatic ineligible to inherit the throne but recognised as hereditary royal councillors. 9 Nelson Mandelas father Gadla Henry Mphakanyiswa Mandela was a local chief and councillor to the monarch; he was appointed to the position in 1915 after his predecessor was accused of corruption by a governing white magistrate. 10 In 1926 Gadla was also sacked for corruption but Nelson was told that his father had lost his job for standing up to the magistrates unreasonable demands. 11 A devotee of the god Qamata 12 Gadla was a polygamist with four wives four sons and nine daughters who lived in different villages. Nelsons mother was Gadlas third wife Nosekeni Fanny daughter of Nkedama of the Right Hand House and a member of the amaMpemvu clan of the Xhosa. 13 No one in my family had ever attended school ... On the first day of school my teacher Miss Mdingane gave each of us an English name. This was the custom among Africans in those days and was undoubtedly due to the British bias of our education. That day Miss Mdingane told me that my new name was Nelson. Why this particular name I have no idea. Mandela 1994 14 Mandela later stated that his early life was dominated by traditional Xhosa custom and taboo. 15 He grew up with two sisters in his mothers kraal in the village of Qunu where he tended herds as a cattle-boy and spent much time outside with other boys. 16 Both his parents were illiterate but his mother being a devout Christian sent him to a local Methodist school when he was about seven. Baptised a Methodist Mandela was given the English forename of Nelson by his teacher. 17 When Mandela was about nine his father came to stay at Qunu where he died of an undiagnosed ailment that Mandela believed to be lung disease. 18 Feeling cut adrift he later said that he inherited his fathers proud rebelliousness and stubborn sense of fairness . 19 Mandelas mother took him to the Great Place palace at Mqhekezweni where he was entrusted to the guardianship of the Thembu regent Chief Jongintaba Dalindyebo. Although he did not see his mother again for many years Mandela felt that Jongintaba and his wife Noengland treated him as their own child raising him alongside their children. 20 As Mandela attended church services every Sunday with his guardians Christianity became a significant part of his life. 21 He attended a Methodist mission school located next to the palace where he studied English Xhosa history and geography. 22 He developed a love of African history listening to the tales told by elderly visitors to the palace and was influenced by the anti-imperialist rhetoric of a visiting chief Joyi. 23 Nevertheless at the time he considered the European colonizers not as oppressors but as benefactors who had brought education and other benefits to southern Africa. 24 Aged 16 he his cousin Justice and several other boys travelled to Tyhalarha to undergo the ulwaluko circumcision ritual that symbolically marked their transition from boys to men; afterwards he was given the name Dalibunga . 25 Clarkebury Healdtown and Fort Hare: 19341940 Photograph of Mandela taken in Umtata 1937 Intending to gain skills needed to become a privy councillor for the Thembu royal house Mandela began his secondary education in 1933 at Clarkebury Methodist High School in Engcobo a Western-style institution that was the largest school for black Africans in Thembuland . 26 Made to socialise with other students on an equal basis he claimed that he lost his stuck up attitude becoming best friends with a girl for the first time; he began playing sports and developed his lifelong love of gardening. 27 He completed his Junior Certificate in two years 28 and in 1937 he moved to Healdtown the Methodist college in Fort Beaufort attended by most Thembu royalty including Justice. 29 The headmaster emphasised the superiority of European culture and government but Mandela became increasingly interested in native African culture making his first non-Xhosa friend a speaker of Sotho and coming under the influence of one of his favourite teachers a Xhosa who broke taboo by marrying a Sotho. 30 Mandela spent much of his spare time at Healdtown as a long-distance runner and boxer and in his second year he became a prefect . 31 In 1939 with Jongintabas backing Mandela began work on a BA degree at the University of Fort Hare an elite black institution of approximately 150 students in Alice Eastern Cape . He studied English anthropology politics native administration and Roman Dutch law in his first year desiring to become an interpreter or clerk in the Native Affairs Department . 32 Mandela stayed in the Wesley House dormitory befriending his own kinsman K. D. Matanzima as well as Oliver Tambo who became a close friend and comrade for decades to come. 33 He took up ballroom dancing 34 performed in a drama society play about Abraham Lincoln 35 and gave Bible classes in the local community as part of the Student Christian Association. 36 Although he had friends who held connections to the African National Congress ANC who wanted South Africa to be independent of the British Empire Mandela avoided any involvement with the nascent movement 37 and became a vocal supporter of the British war effort when the Second World War broke out. 38 At the end of his first year he became involved in a students representative council SRC boycott against the quality of food for which he was suspended from the university; he never returned to complete his degree. 39 Arriving in Johannesburg: 19411943 Returning to Mqhekezweni in December 1940 Mandela found that Jongintaba had arranged marriages for him and Justice; dismayed they fled to Johannesburg via Queenstown arriving in April 1941. 40 Mandela found work as a night watchman at Crown Mines his first sight of South African capitalism in action but was fired when the induna headman discovered that he was a runaway. 41 He stayed with a cousin in George Goch Township who introduced Mandela to realtor and ANC activist Walter Sisulu . The latter secured Mandela a job as an articled clerk at the law firm of Witkin Sidelsky and Eidelman a company run by Lazar Sidelsky a liberal Jew sympathetic to the ANCs cause. 42 At the firm Mandela befriended Gaur Radebea Hlubi member of the ANC and Communist Party and Nat Bregman a Jewish communist who became his first white friend. 43 Mandela attended Communist Party gatherings where he was impressed that Europeans Africans Indians and Coloureds mixed as equals. He later stated that he did not join the party because its atheism conflicted with his Christian faith and because he saw the South African struggle as being racially based rather than as class warfare . 44 To continue his higher education Mandela signed up to a University of South Africa correspondence course working on his bachelors degree at night. 45 Earning a small wage Mandela rented a room in the house of the Xhoma family in the Alexandra township; despite being rife with poverty crime and pollution Alexandra always remained a special place for him. 46 Although embarrassed by his poverty he briefly dated a Swazi woman before unsuccessfully courting his landlords daughter. 47 To save money and be closer to downtown Johannesburg Mandela moved into the compound of the Witwatersrand Native Labour Association living among miners of various tribes; as the compound was visited by various chiefs he once met the Queen Regent of Basutoland . 48 In late 1941 Jongintaba visited Johannesburgthere forgiving Mandela for running awaybefore returning to Thembuland where he died in the winter of 1942. 49 After he passed his BA exams in early 1943 Mandela returned to Johannesburg to follow a political path as a lawyer rather than become a privy councillor in Thembuland. 50 Early revolutionary activity Law studies and the ANC Youth League: 19431949 Mandela began studying law at the University of the Witwatersrand where he was the only black African student and faced racism. There he befriended liberal and communist European Jewish and Indian students among them Joe Slovo and Ruth First . 51 Becoming increasingly politicised Mandela marched in August 1943 in support of a successful bus boycott to reverse fare rises. 52 Joining the ANC he was increasingly influenced by Sisulu spending time with other activists at Sisulus Orlando house including his old friend Oliver Tambo. 53 In 1943 Mandela met Anton Lembede an ANC member affiliated with the Africanist branch of African nationalism which was virulently opposed to a racially united front against colonialism and imperialism or to an alliance with the communists. 54 Despite his friendships with non-blacks and communists Mandela embraced Lembedes views believing that black Africans should be entirely independent in their struggle for political self-determination. 55 Deciding on the need for a youth wing to mass-mobilise Africans in opposition to their subjugation Mandela was among a delegation that approached ANC president Alfred Bitini Xuma on the subject at his home in Sophiatown ; the African National Congress Youth League ANCYL was founded on Easter Sunday 1944 in the Bantu Mens Social Centre with Lembede as president and Mandela as a member of its executive committee. 56 Mandela and Evelyn in July 1944 at Walter and Albertina Sisulus wedding party in the Bantu Mens Social Centre 57 At Sisulus house Mandela met Evelyn Mase a trainee nurse and ANC activist from Engcobo Transkei. Entering a relationship and marrying in October 1944 they initially lived with her relatives until moving into a rented house in the township of Orlando in early 1946. 58 Their first child Madiba Thembi Thembekile was born in February 1945; a daughter Makaziwe was born in 1947 but died of meningitis nine months later. 59 Mandela enjoyed home life welcoming his mother and his sister Leabie to stay with him. 60 In early 1947 his three years of articles ended at Witkin Sidelsky and Eidelman and he decided to become a full-time student subsisting on loans from the Bantu Welfare Trust. 61 In July 1947 Mandela rushed Lembede who was ill to hospital where he died; he was succeeded as ANCYL president by the more moderate Peter Mda who agreed to co-operate with communists and non-blacks appointing Mandela ANCYL secretary. 62 Mandela disagreed with Mdas approach and in December 1947 supported an unsuccessful measure to expel communists from the ANCYL considering their ideology un-African. 63 In 1947 Mandela was elected to the executive committee of the ANCs Transvaal Province branch serving under regional president C. S. Ramohanoe. When Ramohanoe acted against the wishes of the committee by co-operating with Indians and communists Mandela was one of those who forced his resignation. 64 In the South African general election in 1948 in which only whites were permitted to vote the Afrikaner-dominated Herenigde Nasionale Party under Daniel Francois Malan took power soon uniting with the Afrikaner Party to form the National Party . Openly racialist the party codified and expanded racial segregation with new apartheid legislation . 65 Gaining increasing influence in the ANC Mandela and his party cadre allies began advocating direct action against apartheid such as boycotts and strikes influenced by the tactics already employed by South Africas Indian community. Xuma did not support these measures and was removed from the presidency in a vote of no confidence replaced by James Moroka and a more militant executive committee containing Sisulu Mda Tambo and Godfrey Pitje. 66 Mandela later related that he and his colleagues had guided the ANC to a more radical and revolutionary path. 67 Having devoted his time to politics Mandela failed his final year at Witwatersrand three times; he was ultimately denied his degree in December 1949. 68 Defiance Campaign and Transvaal ANC Presidency: 19501954 The ANCs tricolour flag; black for the people green for the land and gold for the resources of Africa 69 Mandela took Xumas place on the ANC national executive in March 1950 70 and that same year was elected national president of the ANCYL. 71 In March the Defend Free Speech Convention was held in Johannesburg bringing together African Indian and communist activists to call a May Day general strike in protest against apartheid and white minority rule. Mandela opposed the strike because it was multi-racial and not ANC-led but a majority of black workers took part resulting in increased police repression and the introduction of the Suppression of Communism Act 1950 affecting the actions of all protest groups. 72 At the ANC national conference of December 1951 he continued arguing against a racially united front but was outvoted. 73 Thereafter Mandela rejected Lembedes Africanism and embraced the idea of a multi-racial front against apartheid. 74 Influenced by friends like Moses Kotane and by the Soviet Union s support for wars of national liberation his mistrust of communism broke down and he began reading literature by Karl Marx Vladimir Lenin and Mao Zedong eventually embracing the Marxist philosophy of dialectical materialism . 75 Commenting on communism he later stated that he found himself strongly drawn to the idea of a classless society which to his mind was similar to traditional African culture where life was shared and communal. 76 In April 1952 Mandela began work at the H.M. Basner law firm which was owned by a communist 77 although his increasing commitment to work and activism meant he spent less time with his family. 78 In 1952 the ANC began preparation for a joint Defiance Campaign against apartheid with Indian and communist groups founding a National Voluntary Board to recruit volunteers. The campaign was designed to follow the path of nonviolent resistance influenced by Mahatma Gandhi ; some supported this for ethical reasons but Mandela instead considered it pragmatic. 79 At a Durban rally on 22 June Mandela addressed an assembled crowd of 10 000 people initiating the campaign protests for which he was arrested and briefly interned in Marshall Square prison. 80 These events established Mandela as one of the best-known black political figures in South Africa. 81 With further protests the ANCs membership grew from 20 000 to 100 000 members; the government responded with mass arrests and introduced the Public Safety Act 1953 to permit martial law . 82 In May authorities banned Transvaal ANC president J. B. Marks from making public appearances; unable to maintain his position he recommended Mandela as his successor. Although Africanists opposed his candidacy Mandela was elected to be regional president in October. 83 Mandelas former home in the Johannesburg township of Soweto In July 1952 Mandela was arrested under the Suppression of Communism Act and stood trial as one of the 21 accusedamong them Moroka Sisulu and Yusuf Dadoo in Johannesburg. Found guilty of statutory communism a term that the government used to describe most opposition to apartheid their sentence of nine months hard labour was suspended for two years. 84 In December Mandela was given a six-month ban from attending meetings or talking to more than one individual at a time making his Transvaal ANC presidency impractical and during this period the Defiance Campaign petered out. 85 In September 1953 Andrew Kunene read out Mandelas No Easy Walk to Freedom speech at a Transvaal ANC meeting; the title was taken from a quote by Indian independence leader Jawaharlal Nehru a seminal influence on Mandelas thought. The speech laid out a contingency plan for a scenario in which the ANC was banned. This Mandela Plan or M-Plan involved dividing the organisation into a cell structure with a more centralised leadership. 86 Mandela obtained work as an attorney for the firm Terblanche and Briggish before moving to the liberal-run Helman and Michel passing qualification exams to become a full-fledged attorney. 87 In August 1953 Mandela and Tambo opened their own law firm Mandela and Tambo operating in downtown Johannesburg. The only African-run law firm in the country it was popular with aggrieved black people often dealing with cases of police brutality . Disliked by the authorities the firm was forced to relocate to a remote location after their office permit was removed under the Group Areas Act ; as a result their clientele dwindled. 88 As a lawyer of aristocratic heritage Mandela was part of Johannesburgs elite black middle-class and accorded much respect from the black community. 89 Although a second daughter Makaziwe Phumia was born in May 1954 Mandelas relationship with Evelyn became strained and she accused him of adultery. He may have had affairs with ANC member Lillian Ngoyi and secretary Ruth Mompati; various individuals close to Mandela in this period have stated that the latter bore him a child. 90 Disgusted by her sons behaviour Nosekeni returned to Transkei while Evelyn embraced the Jehovahs Witnesses and rejected Mandelas preoccupation with politics. 91 Congress of the People and the Treason Trial: 19551961 Main article: Treason Trial We the people of South Africa declare for all our country and the world to know: That South Africa belongs to all who live in it black and white and that no government can justly claim authority unless it is based on the will of the people. Opening words of the Freedom Charter 92 After taking part in the unsuccessful protest to prevent the forced relocation of all black people from the Sophiatown suburb of Johannesburg in February 1955 Mandela concluded that violent action would prove necessary to end apartheid and white minority rule. 93 On his advice Sisulu requested weaponry from the Peoples Republic of China which was denied. Although the Chinese government supported the anti-apartheid struggle they believed the movement insufficiently prepared for guerrilla warfare . 94 With the involvement of the South African Indian Congress the Coloured Peoples Congress the South African Congress of Trade Unions and the Congress of Democrats the ANC planned a Congress of the People calling on all South Africans to send in proposals for a post-apartheid era. Based on the responses a Freedom Charter was drafted by Rusty Bernstein calling for the creation of a democratic non-racialist state with the nationalisation of major industry. The charter was adopted at a June 1955 conference in Kliptown which was forcibly closed down by police. 95 The tenets of the Freedom Charter remained important for Mandela and in 1956 he described it as an inspiration to the people of South Africa . 96 Following the end of a second ban in September 1955 Mandela went on a working holiday to Transkei to discuss the implications of the Bantu Authorities Act 1951 with local Xhosa chiefs also visiting his mother and Noengland before proceeding to Cape Town . 97 In March 1956 he received his third ban on public appearances restricting him to Johannesburg for five years but he often defied it. 98 Mandelas marriage broke down and Evelyn left him taking their children to live with her brother. Initiating divorce proceedings in May 1956 she claimed that Mandela had physically abused her; he denied the allegations and fought for custody of their children. 99 She withdrew her petition of separation in November but Mandela filed for divorce in January 1958; the divorce was finalised in March with the children placed in Evelyns care. 100 During the divorce proceedings he began courting a social worker Winnie Madikizela whom he married in Bizana in June 1958. She later became involved in ANC activities spending several weeks in prison. 101 Together they had two children: Zenani born in February 1959 and Zindziswa 19602020. 102 An apartheid sign; apartheid legislation impacted all areas of life. In December 1956 Mandela was arrested alongside most of the ANC national executive and accused of high treason against the state. Held in Johannesburg Prison amid mass protests they underwent a preparatory examination before being granted bail. 103 The defences refutation began in January 1957 overseen by defence lawyer Vernon Berrange and continued until the case was adjourned in September. In January 1958 Oswald Pirow was appointed to prosecute the case and in February the judge ruled that there was sufficient reason for the defendants to go on trial in the Transvaal Supreme Court . 104 The formal Treason Trial began in Pretoria in August 1958 with the defendants successfully applying to have the three judgesall linked to the governing National Partyreplaced. In August one charge was dropped and in October the prosecution withdrew its indictment submitting a reformulated version in November which argued that the ANC leadership committed high treason by advocating violent revolution a charge the defendants denied. 105 In April 1959 Africanists dissatisfied with the ANCs united front approach founded the Pan-Africanist Congress PAC; Mandela disagreed with the PACs racially exclusionary views describing them as immature and naive . 106 Both parties took part in an anti-pass campaign in early 1960 in which Africans burned the passes that they were legally obliged to carry . One of the PAC-organised demonstrations was fired upon by police resulting in the deaths of 69 protesters in the Sharpeville massacre . The incident brought international condemnation of the government and resulted in rioting throughout South Africa with Mandela publicly burning his pass in solidarity. 107 Responding to the unrest the government implemented state of emergency measures declaring martial law and banning the ANC and PAC; in March they arrested Mandela and other activists imprisoning them for five months without charge in the unsanitary conditions of the Pretoria Local prison. 108 Imprisonment caused problems for Mandela and his co-defendants in the Treason Trial; their lawyers could not reach them and so it was decided that the lawyers would withdraw in protest until the accused were freed from prison when the state of emergency was lifted in late August 1960. 109 Over the following months Mandela used his free time to organise an All-In African Conference near Pietermaritzburg Natal in March 1961 at which 1 400 anti-apartheid delegates met agreeing on a stay-at-home strike to mark 31 May the day South Africa became a republic. 110 On 29 March 1961 six years after the Treason Trial began the judges produced a verdict of not guilty ruling that there was insufficient evidence to convict the accused of high treason since they had advocated neither communism nor violent revolution; the outcome embarrassed the government. 111 MK the SACP and African tour: 196162 Thatched room at Liliesleaf Farm where Mandela hid Disguised as a chauffeur Mandela travelled around the country incognito organising the ANCs new cell structure and the planned mass stay-at-home strike. Referred to as the Black Pimpernel in the pressa reference to Emma Orczy s 1905 novel The Scarlet Pimpernel a warrant for his arrest was put out by the police. 112 Mandela held secret meetings with reporters and after the government failed to prevent the strike he warned them that many anti-apartheid activists would soon resort to violence through groups like the PACs Poqo . 113 He believed that the ANC should form an armed group to channel some of this violence in a controlled direction convincing both ANC leader Albert Luthuli who was morally opposed to violenceand allied activist groups of its necessity. 114 Inspired by the actions of Fidel Castro s 26th of July Movement in the Cuban Revolution in 1961 Mandela Sisulu and Slovo co-founded Umkhonto we Sizwe Spear of the Nation abbreviated MK. Becoming chairman of the militant group Mandela gained ideas from literature on guerrilla warfare by Marxist militants Mao and Che Guevara as well as from the military theorist Carl von Clausewitz . 115 Although initially declared officially separate from the ANC so as not to taint the latters reputation MK was later widely recognised as the partys armed wing. 116 Most early MK members were white communists who were able to conceal Mandela in their homes; after hiding in communist Wolfie Kodeshs flat in Berea Mandela moved to the communist-owned Liliesleaf Farm in Rivonia there joined by Raymond Mhlaba Slovo and Bernstein who put together the MK constitution. 117 Although in later life Mandela denied for political reasons ever being a member of the Communist Party historical research published in 2011 strongly suggested that he had joined in the late 1950s or early 1960s. 118 This was confirmed by both the SACP and the ANC after Mandelas death. According to the SACP he was not only a member of the party but also served on its Central Committee. 119 120 We of Umkhonto have always sought to achieve liberation without bloodshed and civil clash. Even at this late hour we hope that our first actions will awaken everyone to a realization of the dangerous situation to which Nationalist policy is leading. We hope that we will bring the Government and its supporters to their senses before it is too late so that both government and its policies can be changed before matters reach the desperate stage of civil war. Statement released by MK to announce the start of their sabotage campaign 121 Operating through a cell structure MK planned to carry out acts of sabotage that would exert maximum pressure on the government with minimum casualties; they sought to bomb military installations power plants telephone lines and transport links at night when civilians were not present. Mandela stated that they chose sabotage because it was the least harmful action did not involve killing and offered the best hope for racial reconciliation afterwards; he nevertheless acknowledged that should this have failed then guerrilla warfare might have been necessary. 122 Soon after ANC leader Luthuli was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize MK publicly announced its existence with 57 bombings on Dinganes Day 16 December 1961 followed by further attacks on New Years Eve. 123 The ANC decided to send Mandela as a delegate to the February 1962 meeting of the Pan-African Freedom Movement for East Central and Southern Africa PAFMECSA in Addis Ababa Ethiopia. 124 Leaving South Africa in secret via Bechuanaland on his way Mandela visited Tanganyika and met with its president Julius Nyerere . 125 Arriving in Ethiopia Mandela met with Emperor Haile Selassie I and gave his speech after Selassies at the conference. 126 After the symposium he travelled to Cairo Egypt admiring the political reforms of President Gamal Abdel Nasser and in April 1962 he went to Morocco where asked El Khatib to meet the king to ask him to give him 5 000. The next day he got the 5 000 along with some weapons and training to Mandelas soldier and then went to Tunis Tunisia where President Habib Bourguiba gave him 5 000 for weaponry. He proceeded to Morocco Mali Guinea Sierra Leone Liberia and Senegal receiving funds from Liberian president William Tubman and Guinean president Ahmed Sekou Toure . 127 He left Africa for London England where he met anti-apartheid activists reporters and prominent politicians. 128 Upon returning to Ethiopia he began a six-month course in guerrilla warfare but completed only two months before being recalled to South Africa by the ANCs leadership. 129 Imprisonment Arrest and Rivonia trial: 19621964 Main article: Rivonia Trial On 5 August 1962 police captured Mandela along with fellow activist Cecil Williams near Howick . 130 Many MK members suspected that the authorities had been tipped off with regard to Mandelas whereabouts although Mandela himself gave these ideas little credence. 131 In later years Donald Rickard a former American diplomat revealed that the Central Intelligence Agency which feared Mandelas associations with communists had informed the South African police of his location. 132 133 Jailed in Johannesburgs Marshall Square prison Mandela was charged with inciting workers strikes and leaving the country without permission. Representing himself with Slovo as legal advisor Mandela intended to use the trial to showcase the ANCs moral opposition to racism while supporters demonstrated outside the court. 134 Moved to Pretoria where Winnie could visit him he began correspondence studies for a Bachelor of Laws LLB degree from the University of London International Programmes . 135 His hearing began in October but he disrupted proceedings by wearing a traditional kaross refusing to call any witnesses and turning his plea of mitigation into a political speech. Found guilty he was sentenced to five years imprisonment; as he left the courtroom supporters sang Nkosi Sikelel iAfrika . 136 I have fought against white domination and I have fought against black domination. I have cherished the ideal of a democratic and free society in which all persons will live together in harmony and with equal opportunities. It is an ideal which I hope to live for and to see realised. But if it needs be it is an ideal for which I am prepared to die. Mandelas Rivonia Trial Speech 1964 137 138 On 11 July 1963 police raided Liliesleaf Farm arresting those that they found there and uncovering paperwork documenting MKs activities some of which mentioned Mandela. The Rivonia Trial began at Pretoria Supreme Court in October with Mandela and his comrades charged with four counts of sabotage and conspiracy to violently overthrow the government; their chief prosecutor was Percy Yutar . 139 Judge Quartus de Wet soon threw out the prosecutions case for insufficient evidence but Yutar reformulated the charges presenting his new case from December 1963 until February 1964 calling 173 witnesses and bringing thousands of documents and photographs to the trial. 140 Although four of the accused denied involvement with MK Mandela and the other five accused admitted sabotage but denied that they had ever agreed to initiate guerrilla war against the government. 141 They used the trial to highlight their political cause; at the opening of the defences proceedings Mandela gave his three-hour I Am Prepared to Die speech. That speechwhich was inspired by Castros History Will Absolve Me was widely reported in the press despite official censorship. 142 The trial gained international attention; there were global calls for the release of the accused from the United Nations and World Peace Council while the University of London Union voted Mandela to its presidency. 143 On 12 June 1964 justice De Wet found Mandela and two of his co-accused guilty on all four charges; although the prosecution had called for the death sentence to be applied the judge instead condemned them to life imprisonment . 144 Robben Island: 19641982 In 1964 Mandela and his co-accused were transferred from Pretoria to the prison on Robben Island remaining there for the next 18 years. 145 Isolated from non-political prisoners in Section B Mandela was imprisoned in a damp concrete cell measuring 8 feet 2.4 m by 7 feet 2.1 m with a straw mat on which to sleep. 146 Verbally and physically harassed by several white prison wardens the Rivonia Trial prisoners spent their days breaking rocks into gravel until being reassigned in January 1965 to work in a lime quarry. Mandela was initially forbidden to wear sunglasses and the glare from the lime permanently damaged his eyesight. 147 At night he worked on his LLB degree which he was obtaining from the University of London through a correspondence course with Wolsey Hall Oxford but newspapers were forbidden and he was locked in solitary confinement on several occasions for the possession of smuggled news clippings. 148 He was initially classified as the lowest grade of prisoner Class D meaning that he was permitted one visit and one letter every six months although all mail was heavily censored. 149 Lime quarry on Robben Island where Mandela and other prisoners were forced to carry out hard labour The political prisoners took part in work and hunger strikes the latter considered largely ineffective by Mandelato improve prison conditions viewing this as a microcosm of the anti-apartheid struggle. 150 ANC prisoners elected him to their four-man High Organ along with Sisulu Govan Mbeki and Raymond Mhlaba and he involved himself in a group named Ulundi that represented all political prisoners including Eddie Daniels on the island through which he forged links with PAC and Yu Chi Chan Club members. 151 Initiating the University of Robben Island whereby prisoners lectured on their own areas of expertise he debated socio-political topics with his comrades. 152 Though attending Christian Sunday services Mandela studied Islam. 153 He also studied Afrikaans hoping to build a mutual respect with the warders and convert them to his cause. 154 Various official visitors met with Mandela most significantly the liberal parliamentary representative Helen Suzman of the Progressive Party who championed Mandelas cause outside of prison. 155 In September 1970 he met British Labour Party politician Denis Healey . 156 South African Minister of Justice Jimmy Kruger visited in December 1974 but he and Mandela did not get along with each other. 157 His mother visited in 1968 dying shortly after and his firstborn son Thembi died in a car accident the following year; Mandela was forbidden from attending either funeral. 158 His wife was rarely able to see him being regularly imprisoned for political activity and his daughters first visited in December 1975. Winnie was released from prison in 1977 but was forcibly settled in Brandfort and remained unable to see him. 159 From 1967 onwards prison conditions improved. Black prisoners were given trousers rather than shorts games were permitted and the standard of their food was raised. 160 In 1969 an escape plan for Mandela was developed by Gordon Bruce but it was abandoned after the conspiracy was infiltrated by an agent of the South African Bureau of State Security BOSS who hoped to see Mandela shot during the escape. 161 In 1970 Commander Piet Badenhorst became commanding officer. Mandela seeing an increase in the physical and mental abuse of prisoners complained to visiting judges who had Badenhorst reassigned. 162 He was replaced by Commander Willie Willemse who developed a co-operative relationship with Mandela and was keen to improve prison standards. 163 The inside of Mandelas prison cell as it was when he was imprisoned in 1964 and his open cell window facing the prison yard on Robben Island now a national and World Heritage Site . Mandelas cell later contained more furniture including a bed from around 1973. 164 By 1975 Mandela had become a Class A prisoner 165 which allowed him greater numbers of visits and letters. He corresponded with anti-apartheid activists like Mangosuthu Buthelezi and Desmond Tutu . 166 That year he began his autobiography which was smuggled to London but remained unpublished at the time; prison authorities discovered several pages and his LLB study privileges were revoked for four years. 167 Instead he devoted his spare time to gardening and reading until the authorities permitted him to resume his LLB degree studies in 1980. 168 By the late 1960s Mandelas fame had been eclipsed by Steve Biko and the Black Consciousness Movement BCM. Seeing the ANC as ineffectual the BCM called for militant action but following the Soweto uprising of 1976 many BCM activists were imprisoned on Robben Island. 169 Mandela tried to build a relationship with these young radicals although he was critical of their racialism and contempt for white anti-apartheid activists. 170 Renewed international interest in his plight came in July 1978 when he celebrated his 60th birthday. 171 He was awarded an honorary doctorate in Lesotho the Jawaharlal Nehru Award for International Understanding in India in 1979 and the Freedom of the City of Glasgow Scotland in 1981. 172 In March 1980 the slogan Free Mandela! was developed by journalist Percy Qoboza sparking an international campaign that led the UN Security Council to call for his release. 173 Despite increasing foreign pressure the government refused relying on its Cold War allies US president Ronald Reagan and British prime minister Margaret Thatcher ; both considered Mandelas ANC a terrorist organisation sympathetic to communism and supported its suppression. 174 Pollsmoor Prison: 19821988 In April 1982 Mandela was transferred to Pollsmoor Prison in Tokai Cape Town along with senior ANC leaders Walter Sisulu Andrew Mlangeni Ahmed Kathrada and Raymond Mhlaba; they believed that they were being isolated to remove their influence on younger activists at Robben Island. 175 Conditions at Pollsmoor were better than at Robben Island although Mandela missed the camaraderie and scenery of the island. 176 Getting on well with Pollsmoors commanding officer Brigadier Munro Mandela was permitted to create a roof garden ; 177 he also read voraciously and corresponded widely now being permitted 52 letters a year. 178 He was appointed patron of the multi-racial United Democratic Front UDF founded to combat reforms implemented by South African president P. W. Botha . Bothas National Party government had permitted Coloured and Indian citizens to vote for their own parliaments which had control over education health and housing but black Africans were excluded from the system. Like Mandela the UDF saw this as an attempt to divide the anti-apartheid movement on racial lines. 179 Bust of Mandela erected on Londons South Bank by the Greater London Council administration of Ken Livingstone in 1985 The early 1980s witnessed an escalation of violence across the country and many predicted civil war. This was accompanied by economic stagnation as various multinational banksunder pressure from an international lobbyhad stopped investing in South Africa. Numerous banks and Thatcher asked Botha to release Mandelathen at the height of his international fameto defuse the volatile situation. 180 Although considering Mandela a dangerous arch-Marxist 181 Botha offered him in February 1985 a release from prison if he unconditionally rejected violence as a political weapon . Mandela spurned the offer releasing a statement through his daughter Zindzi stating What freedom am I being offered while the organisation of the people ANC remains banned? Only free men can negotiate. A prisoner cannot enter into contracts. 182 183 In 1985 Mandela underwent surgery on an enlarged prostate gland before being given new solitary quarters on the ground floor. 184 He was met by an international delegation sent to negotiate a settlement but Bothas government refused to co-operate calling a state of emergency in June and initiating a police crackdown on unrest. 185 The anti-apartheid resistance fought back with the ANC committing 231 attacks in 1986 and 235 in 1987. 186 The violence escalated as the government used the army and police to combat the resistance and provided covert support for vigilante groups and the Zulu nationalist movement Inkatha which was involved in an increasingly violent struggle with the ANC. 187 Mandela requested talks with Botha but was denied instead secretly meeting with Minister of Justice Kobie Coetsee in 1987 and having a further 11 meetings over the next three years. Coetsee organised negotiations between Mandela and a team of four government figures starting in May 1988; the team agreed to the release of political prisoners and the legalisation of the ANC on the condition that they permanently renounce violence break links with the Communist Party and not insist on majority rule . Mandela rejected these conditions insisting that the ANC would end its armed activities only when the government renounced violence. 188 Mandelas 70th birthday in July 1988 attracted international attention including a tribute concert at Londons Wembley Stadium that was televised and watched by an estimated 200 million viewers. 189 Although presented globally as a heroic figure he faced personal problems when ANC leaders informed him that Winnie had set herself up as head of a gang the Mandela United Football Club which had been responsible for torturing and killing opponentsincluding childrenin Soweto. Though some encouraged him to divorce her he decided to remain loyal until she was found guilty by trial. 190 Victor Verster Prison and release: 19881990 Free Mandela protest in East Berlin 1986 Recovering from tuberculosis exacerbated by the damp conditions in his cell 191 Mandela was moved to Victor Verster Prison near Paarl in December 1988. He was housed in the relative comfort of a warders house with a personal cook and he used the time to complete his LLB degree. 192 While there he was permitted many visitors and organised secret communications with exiled ANC leader Oliver Tambo. 193 194 In 1989 Botha suffered a stroke; although he retained the state presidency he stepped down as leader of the National Party to be replaced by F. W. de Klerk . 195 In a surprise move Botha invited Mandela to a meeting over tea in July 1989 an invitation Mandela considered genial. 196 Botha was replaced as state president by de Klerk six weeks later; the new president believed that apartheid was unsustainable and released a number of ANC prisoners. 197 Following the fall of the Berlin Wall in November 1989 de Klerk called his cabinet together to debate legalising the ANC and freeing Mandela. Although some were deeply opposed to his plans de Klerk met with Mandela in December to discuss the situation a meeting both men considered friendly before legalising all formerly banned political parties in February 1990 and announcing Mandelas unconditional release. 198 199 Shortly thereafter for the first time in 20 years photographs of Mandela were allowed to be published in South Africa. 200 Leaving Victor Verster Prison on 11 February Mandela held Winnies hand in front of amassed crowds and the press; the event was broadcast live across the world. 201 202 Driven to Cape Towns City Hall through crowds he gave a speech declaring his commitment to peace and reconciliation with the white minority but he made it clear that the ANCs armed struggle was not over and would continue as a purely defensive action against the violence of apartheid . He expressed hope that the government would agree to negotiations so that there may no longer be the need for the armed struggle and insisted that his main focus was to bring peace to the black majority and give them the right to vote in national and local elections. 203 204 Staying at Tutus home in the following days Mandela met with friends activists and press giving a speech to an estimated 100 000 people at Johannesburgs FNB Stadium . 205 End of apartheid and elections Main article: Negotiations to end apartheid in South Africa Early negotiations: 199091 Luthuli House in Johannesburg which became the ANC headquarters in 1991 Mandela proceeded on an African tour meeting supporters and politicians in Zambia Zimbabwe Namibia Libya and Algeria and continuing to Sweden where he was reunited with Tambo and London where he appeared at the Nelson Mandela: An International Tribute for a Free South Africa concert at Wembley Stadium. 206 Encouraging foreign countries to support sanctions against the apartheid government he met President Francois Mitterrand in France Pope John Paul II in the Vatican and Thatcher in the United Kingdom. In the United States he met President George H. W. Bush addressed both Houses of Congress and visited eight cities being particularly popular among the African American community. 207 In Cuba he became friends with President Castro whom he had long admired. 208 He met President R. Venkataraman in India President Suharto in Indonesia Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad in Malaysia and Prime Minister Bob Hawke in Australia. He visited Japan but not the Soviet Union a longtime ANC supporter. 209 In May 1990 Mandela led a multiracial ANC delegation into preliminary negotiations with a government delegation of 11 Afrikaner men. Mandela impressed them with his discussions of Afrikaner history and the negotiations led to the Groot Schuur Minute in which the government lifted the state of emergency. 210 In August Mandelarecognising the ANCs severe military disadvantageoffered a ceasefire the Pretoria Minute for which he was widely criticised by MK activists. 210 He spent much time trying to unify and build the ANC appearing at a Johannesburg conference in December attended by 1 600 delegates many of whom found him more moderate than expected. 211 At the ANCs July 1991 national conference in Durban Mandela admitted that the party had faults and wanted to build a task force for securing majority rule. 212 At the conference he was elected ANC President replacing the ailing Tambo and a 50-strong multiracial mixed gendered national executive was elected. 212 Mandela was given an office in the newly purchased ANC headquarters at Shell House Johannesburg and moved into Winnies large Soweto home. 213 Their marriage was increasingly strained as he learned of her affair with Dali Mpofu but he supported her during her trial for kidnapping and assault. He gained funding for her defence from the International Defence and Aid Fund for Southern Africa and from Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi but in June 1991 she was found guilty and sentenced to six years in prison reduced to two on appeal. On 13 April 1992 Mandela publicly announced his separation from Winnie. The ANC forced her to step down from the national executive for misappropriating ANC funds; Mandela moved into the mostly white Johannesburg suburb of Houghton . 214 Mandelas prospects for a peaceful transition were further damaged by an increase in black-on-black violence particularly between ANC and Inkatha supporters in KwaZulu-Natal which resulted in thousands of deaths. Mandela met with Inkatha leader Buthelezi but the ANC prevented further negotiations on the issue. Mandela argued that there was a third force within the state intelligence services fuelling the slaughter of the people and openly blamed de Klerkwhom he increasingly distrustedfor the Sebokeng massacre. 215 In September 1991 a national peace conference was held in Johannesburg at which Mandela Buthelezi and de Klerk signed a peace accord though the violence continued. 216 CODESA talks: 199192 The Convention for a Democratic South Africa CODESA began in December 1991 at the Johannesburg World Trade Centre attended by 228 delegates from 19 political parties. Although Cyril Ramaphosa led the ANCs delegation Mandela remained a key figure. After de Klerk used the closing speech to condemn the ANCs violence Mandela took to the stage to denounce de Klerk as the head of an illegitimate discredited minority regime . Dominated by the National Party and ANC little negotiation was achieved. 217 CODESA 2 was held in May 1992 at which de Klerk insisted that post-apartheid South Africa must use a federal system with a rotating presidency to ensure the protection of ethnic minorities; Mandela opposed this demanding a unitary system governed by majority rule. 218 Following the Boipatong massacre of ANC activists by government-aided Inkatha militants Mandela called off the negotiations before attending a meeting of the Organisation of African Unity in Senegal at which he called for a special session of the UN Security Council and proposed that a UN peacekeeping force be stationed in South Africa to prevent state terrorism . 219 Calling for domestic mass action in August the ANC organised the largest-ever strike in South African history and supporters marched on Pretoria. 220 De Klerk and Mandela at the World Economic Forum 1992 Following the Bisho massacre in which 28 ANC supporters and one soldier were shot dead by the Ciskei Defence Force during a protest march Mandela realised that mass action was leading to further violence and resumed negotiations in September. He agreed to do so on the conditions that all political prisoners be released that Zulu traditional weapons be banned and that Zulu hostels would be fenced off; de Klerk reluctantly agreed. 221 The negotiations agreed that a multiracial general election would be held resulting in a five-year coalition government of national unity and a constitutional assembly that gave the National Party continuing influence. The ANC also conceded to safeguarding the jobs of white civil servants; such concessions brought fierce internal criticism. 222 The duo agreed on an interim constitution based on a liberal democratic model guaranteeing separation of powers creating a constitutional court and including a US-style bill of rights ; it also divided the country into nine provinces each with its own premier and civil service a concession between de Klerks desire for federalism and Mandelas for unitary government. 223 The democratic process was threatened by the Concerned South Africans Group COSAG an alliance of black ethnic-secessionist groups like Inkatha and far-right Afrikaner parties; in June 1993 one of the latterthe Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging AWB attacked the Kempton Park World Trade Centre . 224 Following the murder of ANC activist Chris Hani Mandela made a publicised speech to calm rioting soon after appearing at a mass funeral in Soweto for Tambo who had died of a stroke. 225 In July 1993 both Mandela and de Klerk visited the United States independently meeting President Bill Clinton and each receiving the Liberty Medal . 226 Soon after Mandela and de Klerk were jointly awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in Norway. 227 Influenced by Thabo Mbeki Mandela began meeting with big business figures and he played down his support for nationalisation fearing that he would scare away much-needed foreign investment. Although criticised by socialist ANC members he had been encouraged to embrace private enterprise by members of the Chinese and Vietnamese Communist parties at the January 1992 World Economic Forum in Switzerland. 228 General election: 1994 Main article: 1994 South African general election Mandela casting his vote in the 1994 election With the election set for 27 April 1994 the ANC began campaigning opening 100 election offices and orchestrating Peoples Forums across the country at which Mandela could appear as a popular figure with great status among black South Africans. 229 The ANC campaigned on a Reconstruction and Development Programme RDP to build a million houses in five years introduce universal free education and extend access to water and electricity. The partys slogan was a better life for all although it was not explained how this development would be funded. 230 With the exception of the Weekly Mail and the New Nation South Africas press opposed Mandelas election fearing continued ethnic strife instead supporting the National or Democratic Party . 231 Mandela devoted much time to fundraising for the ANC touring North America Europe and Asia to meet wealthy donors including former supporters of the apartheid regime. 232 He also urged a reduction in the voting age from 18 to 14; rejected by the ANC this policy became the subject of ridicule. 233 Concerned that COSAG would undermine the election particularly in the wake of the conflict in Bophuthatswana and the Shell House massacre incidents of violence involving the AWB and Inkatha respectivelyMandela met with Afrikaner politicians and generals including P. W. Botha Pik Botha and Constand Viljoen persuading many to work within the democratic system. With de Klerk he also convinced Inkathas Buthelezi to enter the elections rather than launch a war of secession. 234 As leaders of the two major parties de Klerk and Mandela appeared on a televised debate; Mandelas offer to shake his hand surprised him leading some commentators to deem it a victory for Mandela. 235 The election went ahead with little violence although an AWB cell killed 20 with car bombs. As widely expected the ANC won a sweeping victory taking 63 of the vote just short of the two-thirds majority needed to unilaterally change the constitution. The ANC was also victorious in seven provinces with Inkatha and the National Party each taking one. 236 237 Mandela voted at the Ohlange High School in Durban and though the ANCs victory assured his election as president he publicly accepted that the election had been marred by instances of fraud and sabotage. 238 Presidency of South Africa: 19941999 Main article: Presidency of Nelson Mandela The newly elected National Assemblys first act was to formally elect Mandela as South Africas first black chief executive. His inauguration took place in Pretoria on 10 May 1994 televised to a billion viewers globally. The event was attended by four thousand guests including world leaders from a wide range of geographic and ideological backgrounds. 239 Mandela headed a Government of National Unity dominated by the ANCwhich had no experience of governing by itselfbut containing representatives from the National Party and Inkatha. Under the Interim Constitution Inkatha and the National Party were entitled to seats in the government by virtue of winning at least 20 seats. In keeping with earlier agreements both de Klerk and Thabo Mbeki were given the position of Deputy President . 240 241 Although Mbeki had not been his first choice for the job Mandela grew to rely heavily on him throughout his presidency allowing him to shape policy details. 242 Moving into the presidential office at Tuynhuys in Cape Town Mandela allowed de Klerk to retain the presidential residence in the Groote Schuur estate instead settling into the nearby Westbrooke manor which he renamed Genadendal meaning Valley of Mercy in Afrikaans. 243 Retaining his Houghton home he also had a house built in his home village of Qunu which he visited regularly meeting with locals and judging tribal disputes. 244 Aged 76 he faced various ailments and although exhibiting continued energy he felt isolated and lonely. 245 He often entertained celebrities such as Michael Jackson Whoopi Goldberg and the Spice Girls and befriended ultra-rich businessmen like Harry Oppenheimer of Anglo American . He also met with Queen Elizabeth II on her March 1995 state visit to South Africa which earned him strong criticism from ANC anti-capitalists. 246 Despite his opulent surroundings Mandela lived simply donating a third of his R 552 000 annual income to the Nelson Mandela Childrens Fund which he had founded in 1995. 247 Although dismantling press censorship speaking out in favour of freedom of the press and befriending many journalists Mandela was critical of much of the countrys media noting that it was overwhelmingly owned and run by middle-class whites and believing that it focused too heavily on scaremongering about crime. 248 In December 1994 Mandela published Long Walk to Freedom an autobiography based around a manuscript he had written in prison augmented by interviews conducted with American journalist Richard Stengel . 249 In late 1994 he attended the 49th conference of the ANC in Bloemfontein at which a more militant national executive was elected among them Winnie Mandela; although she expressed an interest in reconciling Nelson initiated divorce proceedings in August 1995. 250 By 1995 he had entered into a relationship with Graca Machel a Mozambican political activist 27 years his junior who was the widow of former president Samora Machel . They had first met in July 1990 when she was still in mourning but their friendship grew into a partnership with Machel accompanying him on many of his foreign visits. She turned down Mandelas first marriage proposal wanting to retain some independence and dividing her time between Mozambique and Johannesburg. 251 National reconciliation Gracious but steely Mandela steered a country in turmoil toward a negotiated settlement: a country that days before its first democratic election remained violent riven by divisive views and personalities. He endorsed national reconciliation an idea he did not merely foster in the abstract but performed with panache and conviction in reaching out to former adversaries. He initiated an era of hope that while not long-lasting was nevertheless decisive and he garnered the highest international recognition and affection. Rita Barnard The Cambridge Companion to Nelson Mandela 252 Presiding over the transition from apartheid minority rule to a multicultural democracy Mandela saw national reconciliation as the primary task of his presidency. 253 Having seen other post-colonial African economies damaged by the departure of white elites Mandela worked to reassure South Africas white population that they were protected and represented in the Rainbow Nation . 254 Although his Government of National Unity would be dominated by the ANC 255 he attempted to create a broad coalition by appointing de Klerk as Deputy President and appointing other National Party officials as ministers for Agriculture Environment and Minerals and Energy as well as naming Buthelezi as Minister for Home Affairs . 256 The other cabinet positions were taken by ANC members many of whomlike Joe Modise Alfred Nzo Joe Slovo Mac Maharaj and Dullah Omar had long been comrades of Mandela although others such as Tito Mboweni and Jeff Radebe were far younger. 257 Mandelas relationship with de Klerk was strained; Mandela thought that de Klerk was intentionally provocative and de Klerk felt that he was being intentionally humiliated by the president. 258 In January 1995 Mandela heavily chastised de Klerk for awarding amnesty to 3 500 police officers just before the election and later criticised him for defending former Minister of Defence Magnus Malan when the latter was charged with murder. 258 Mandela personally met with senior figures of the apartheid regime including lawyer Percy Yutar and Hendrik Verwoerd s widow Betsie Schoombie also laying a wreath by the statue of Afrikaner hero Daniel Theron . 259 Emphasising personal forgiveness and reconciliation he announced that courageous people do not fear forgiving for the sake of peace. 260 He encouraged black South Africans to get behind the previously hated national rugby team the Springboks as South Africa hosted the 1995 Rugby World Cup . Mandela wore a Springbok shirt at the final against New Zealand and after the Springboks won the match Mandela presented the trophy to captain Francois Pienaar an Afrikaner. This was widely seen as a major step in the reconciliation of white and black South Africans; as de Klerk later put it Mandela won the hearts of millions of white rugby fans. 261 262 Mandelas efforts at reconciliation assuaged the fears of white people but also drew criticism from more militant black people. 263 Among the latter was his estranged wife Winnie who accused the ANC of being more interested in appeasing the white community than in helping the black majority. 264 Mandela oversaw the formation of a Truth and Reconciliation Commission to investigate crimes committed under apartheid by both the government and the ANC appointing Tutu as its chair. To prevent the creation of martyrs the commission granted individual amnesties in exchange for testimony of crimes committed during the apartheid era. Dedicated in February 1996 it held two years of hearings detailing rapes torture bombings and assassinations before issuing its final report in October 1998. Both de Klerk and Mbeki appealed to have parts of the report suppressed though only de Klerks appeal was successful. 265 Mandela praised the commissions work stating that it had helped us move away from the past to concentrate on the present and the future . 266 Domestic programmes Houses in Soweto constructed under the RDP program Mandelas administration inherited a country with a huge disparity in wealth and services between white and black communities. Of a population of 40 million around 23 million lacked electricity or adequate sanitation and 12 million lacked clean water supplies with 2 million children not in school and a third of the population illiterate. There was 33 unemployment and just under half of the population lived below the poverty line. 267 Government financial reserves were nearly depleted with a fifth of the national budget being spent on debt repayment meaning that the extent of the promised Reconstruction and Development Programme RDP was scaled back with none of the proposed nationalisation or job creation. 268 In 1996 the RDP was replaced with a new policy Growth Employment and Redistribution GEAR which maintained South Africas mixed economy but placed an emphasis on economic growth through a framework of market economics and the encouragement of foreign investment; many in the ANC derided it as a neo-liberal policy that did not address social inequality no matter how Mandela defended it. 269 In adopting this approach Mandelas government adhered to the Washington consensus advocated by the World Bank and International Monetary Fund . 270 Under Mandelas presidency welfare spending increased by 13 in 199697 13 in 199798 and 7 in 199899. 271 The government introduced parity in grants for communities including disability grants child maintenance grants and old-age pensions which had previously been set at different levels for South Africas different racial groups. 271 In 1994 free healthcare was introduced for children under six and pregnant women a provision extended to all those using primary level public sector health care services in 1996. 272 273 By the 1999 election the ANC could boast that due to their policies 3 million people were connected to telephone lines 1.5 million children were brought into the education system 500 clinics were upgraded or constructed 2 million people were connected to the electricity grid water access was extended to 3 million people and 750 000 houses were constructed housing nearly 3 million people. 274 Mandela on a visit to Brazil in 1998 The Land Reform Act 3 of 1996 safeguarded the rights of labour tenants living on farms where they grew crops or grazed livestock. This legislation ensured that such tenants could not be evicted without a court order or if they were over the age of 65. 275 Recognising that arms manufacturing was a key industry for the South African economy Mandela endorsed the trade in weapons but brought in tighter regulations surrounding Armscor to ensure that South African weaponry was not sold to authoritarian regimes. 276 Under Mandelas administration tourism was increasingly promoted becoming a major sector of the South African economy. 277 Critics like Edwin Cameron accused Mandelas government of doing little to stem the HIVAIDS pandemic in the country; by 1999 10 of South Africas population were HIV positive. Mandela later admitted that he had personally neglected the issue in part due to public reticence in discussing issues surrounding sex in South Africa and that he had instead left the issue for Mbeki to deal with. 278 279 Mandela also received criticism for failing to sufficiently combat crime; South Africa had one of the worlds highest crime rates 280 and the activities of international crime syndicates in the country grew significantly throughout the decade. 281 Mandelas administration was also perceived as having failed to deal with the problem of corruption. 282 Further problems were caused by the exodus of thousands of skilled white South Africans from the country who were escaping the increasing crime rates higher taxes and the impact of positive discrimination toward black people in employment. This exodus resulted in a brain drain and Mandela criticised those who left. 283 At the same time South Africa experienced an influx of millions of illegal migrants from poorer parts of Africa; although public opinion toward these illegal immigrants was generally unfavourable characterising them as disease-spreading criminals who were a drain on resources Mandela called on South Africans to embrace them as brothers and sisters . 284 Foreign affairs Mandela expressed the view that South Africas future foreign relations should be based on our belief that human rights should be the core of international relations . 285 Following the South African example Mandela encouraged other nations to resolve conflicts through diplomacy and reconciliation. 286 In September 1998 Mandela was appointed secretary-general of the Non-Aligned Movement who held their annual conference in Durban. He used the event to criticise the narrow chauvinistic interests of the Israeli government in stalling negotiations to end the IsraeliPalestinian conflict and urged India and Pakistan to negotiate to end the Kashmir conflict for which he was criticised by both Israel and India. 287 Inspired by the regions economic boom Mandela sought greater economic relations with East Asia in particular with Malaysia although this was prevented by the 1997 Asian financial crisis . 288 He extended diplomatic recognition to the Peoples Republic of China PRC who were growing as an economic force and initially also to Taiwan who were already longstanding investors in the South African economy. However under pressure from the PRC he cut recognition of Taiwan in November 1996 and he paid an official visit to Beijing in May 1999. 289 Mandela with US president Bill Clinton . Despite publicly criticising him on several occasions Mandela liked Clinton and personally supported him during his impeachment proceedings . 290 Mandela attracted controversy for his close relationship with Indonesian president Suharto whose regime was responsible for mass human rights abuses although on a July 1997 visit to Indonesia he privately urged Suharto to withdraw from the occupation of East Timor . 291 He also faced similar criticism from the West for his governments trade links to Syria Cuba and Libya 292 and for his personal friendships with Castro and Gaddafi. 293 Castro visited South Africa in 1998 to widespread popular acclaim and Mandela met Gaddafi in Libya to award him the Order of Good Hope . 293 When Western governments and media criticised these visits Mandela lambasted such criticism as having racist undertones 294 and stated that the enemies of countries in the West are not our enemies. 292 Mandela hoped to resolve the long-running dispute between Libya and the United States and Britain over bringing to trial the two Libyans Abdelbaset al-Megrahi and Lamin Khalifah Fhimah who were indicted in November 1991 and accused of sabotaging Pan Am Flight 103 . Mandela proposed that they be tried in a third country which was agreed to by all parties; governed by Scots law the trial was held at Camp Zeist in the Netherlands in April 1999 and found one of the two men guilty. 295 296 Mandela echoed Mbekis calls for an African Renaissance and he was greatly concerned with issues on the continent. 297 He took a soft diplomatic approach to removing Sani Abacha s military junta in Nigeria but later became a leading figure in calling for sanctions when Abachas regime increased human rights violations. 298 In 1996 he was appointed chairman of the Southern African Development Community SADC and initiated unsuccessful negotiations to end the First Congo War in Zaire . 299 He also played a key role as a mediator in the ethnic conflict between Tutsi and Hutu political groups in the Burundian Civil War helping to initiate a settlement which brought increased stability to the country but did not end the ethnic violence. 300 In South Africas first post-apartheid military operation troops were ordered into Lesotho in September 1998 to protect the government of Prime Minister Pakalitha Mosisili after a disputed election had prompted opposition uprisings. The action was not authorised by Mandela himself who was out of the country at the time but by Buthelezi who was serving as acting president during Mandelas absence 301 with the approval of Mandela and Mbeki. 302 Withdrawing from politics In the latter part of his presidency Mandela increasingly relied on his Deputy President Thabo Mbeki pictured. The new Constitution of South Africa was agreed upon by parliament in May 1996 enshrining a series of institutions to place checks on political and administrative authority within a constitutional democracy. 303 De Klerk opposed the implementation of this constitution and that month he and the National Party withdrew from the coalition government in protest claiming that the ANC were not treating them as equals. 304 The ANC took over the cabinet positions formerly held by the Nationals with Mbeki becoming sole Deputy President. 305 Inkatha remained part of the coalition 306 and when both Mandela and Mbeki were out of the country in September 1998 Buthelezi was appointed Acting President marking an improvement in his relationship with Mandela. 307 Although Mandela had often governed decisively in his first two years as president 308 he had subsequently increasingly delegated duties to Mbeki retaining only a close personal supervision of intelligence and security measures. 309 During a 1997 visit to London he said that the ruler of South Africa the de facto ruler is Thabo Mbeki and that he was shifting everything to him . 308 Mandela stepped down as ANC President at the partys December 1997 conference. He hoped that Ramaphosa would succeed him believing Mbeki to be too inflexible and intolerant of criticism but the ANC elected Mbeki regardless. 310 Mandela and the Executive supported Jacob Zuma a Zulu who had been imprisoned on Robben Island as Mbekis replacement for Deputy President. Zumas candidacy was challenged by Winnie whose populist rhetoric had gained her a strong following within the party although Zuma defeated her in a landslide victory vote at the election. 311 Mandelas relationship with Machel had intensified; in February 1998 he publicly stated that he was in love with a remarkable lady and under pressure from Tutu who urged him to set an example for young people he organised a wedding for his 80th birthday in July that year. 312 The following day he held a grand party with many foreign dignitaries. 313 Although the 1996 constitution allowed the president to serve two consecutive five-year terms Mandela had never planned to stand for a second term in office. He gave his farewell speech to Parliament on 29 March 1999 when it adjourned prior to the 1999 general elections after which he retired. 314 Although opinion polls in South Africa showed wavering support for both the ANC and the government Mandela himself remained highly popular with 80 of South Africans polled in 1999 expressing satisfaction with his performance as president. 315 Post-presidency and final years Continued activism and philanthropy: 19992004 Mandela visiting the London School of Economics in 2000 Retiring in June 1999 Mandela aimed to lead a quiet family life divided between Johannesburg and Qunu. Although he set about authoring a sequel to his first autobiography to be titled The Presidential Years it remained unfinished and was only published posthumously in 2017. 316 Mandela found such seclusion difficult and reverted to a busy public life involving a daily programme of tasks meetings with world leaders and celebrities andwhen in Johannesburgworking with the Nelson Mandela Foundation founded in 1999 to focus on rural development school construction and combating HIVAIDS. 317 Although he had been heavily criticised for failing to do enough to fight the HIVAIDS pandemic during his presidency he devoted much of his time to the issue following his retirement describing it as a war that had killed more than all previous wars ; affiliating himself with the Treatment Action Campaign he urged Mbekis government to ensure that HIV-positive South Africans had access to anti-retrovirals . 318 Meanwhile Mandela was successfully treated for prostate cancer in July 2001. 319 320 In 2002 Mandela inaugurated the Nelson Mandela Annual Lecture and in 2003 the Mandela Rhodes Foundation was created at Rhodes House University of Oxford to provide postgraduate scholarships to African students. These projects were followed by the Nelson Mandela Centre of Memory and the 46664 campaign against HIVAIDS. 321 He gave the closing address at the XIII International AIDS Conference in Durban in 2000 322 and in 2004 spoke at the XV International AIDS Conference in Bangkok Thailand calling for greater measures to tackle tuberculosis as well as HIVAIDS. 323 Mandela publicised AIDS as the cause of his son Makgatho s death in January 2005 to defy the stigma about discussing the disease. 324 Publicly Mandela became more vocal in criticising Western powers. He strongly opposed the 1999 NATO intervention in Kosovo and called it an attempt by the worlds powerful nations to police the entire world. 325 In 2003 he spoke out against the plans for the United States to launch a war in Iraq describing it as a tragedy and lambasting US president George W. Bush and British prime minister Tony Blair whom he referred to as an American foreign minister for undermining the UN saying All that Mr. Bush wants is Iraqi oil . 326 He attacked the United States more generally asserting that If there is a country that has committed unspeakable atrocities in the world it is the United States of America citing the atomic bombing of Japan ; this attracted international controversy although he later improved his relationship with Bush. 327 328 Retaining an interest in the Lockerbie suspect he visited Megrahi in Barlinnie prison and spoke out against the conditions of his treatment referring to them as psychological persecution . 329 Retiring from retirement : 20042013 Mandela and US president George W. Bush in the Oval Office 2005 In June 2004 aged 85 and amid failing health Mandela announced that he was retiring from retirement and retreating from public life remarking Dont call me I will call you. 330 Although continuing to meet with close friends and family the foundation discouraged invitations for him to appear at public events and denied most interview requests. 319 He retained some involvement in international affairs. In 2005 he founded the Nelson Mandela Legacy Trust 331 travelling to the United States to speak before the Brookings Institution and the NAACP on the need for economic assistance to Africa. 331 332 He spoke with US senator Hillary Clinton and President George W. Bush and first met the then-senator Barack Obama . 332 Mandela also encouraged Zimbabwean president Robert Mugabe to resign over growing human rights abuses in the country. When this proved ineffective he spoke out publicly against Mugabe in 2007 asking him to step down with residual respect and a modicum of dignity. 333 That year Mandela Machel and Desmond Tutu convened a group of world leaders in Johannesburg to contribute their wisdom and independent leadership to some of the worlds toughest problems. Mandela announced the formation of this new group The Elders in a speech delivered on his 89th birthday. 334 Mandela receiving the freedom of the city of Tshwane 2008 Mandelas 90th birthday was marked across the country on 18 July 2008; a tribute concert was held in Hyde Park London. 335 Throughout Mbekis presidency Mandela continued to support the ANC usually overshadowing Mbeki at any public events that the two attended. Mandela was more at ease with Mbekis successor Zuma 336 although the Nelson Mandela Foundation was upset when his grandson Mandla Mandela flew him out to the Eastern Cape to attend a pro-Zuma rally in the midst of a storm in 2009. 336 In 2004 Mandela successfully campaigned for South Africa to host the 2010 FIFA World Cup declaring that there would be few better gifts for us in the year marking a decade since the fall of apartheid. 337 Despite maintaining a low profile during the event due to ill health Mandela made his final public appearance during the World Cup closing ceremony where he received much applause. 338 339 Between 2005 and 2013 Mandela and later his family were embroiled in a series of legal disputes regarding money held in family trusts for the benefit of his descendants. 340 In mid-2013 as Mandela was hospitalised for a lung infection in Pretoria his descendants were involved in an intra-family legal dispute relating to the burial place of Mandelas children and ultimately Mandela himself. 341 Illness and death: 20112013 Main article: Death and state funeral of Nelson Mandela Members of the public paying their respects outside Mandelas Houghton home In February 2011 Mandela was briefly hospitalised with a respiratory infection attracting international attention 342 343 before being re-admitted for a lung infection and gallstone removal in December 2012. 344 345 After a successful medical procedure in early March 2013 346 his lung infection recurred and he was briefly hospitalised in Pretoria. 347 In June 2013 his lung infection worsened and he was readmitted to a Pretoria hospital in serious condition. 348 The Archbishop of Cape Town Thabo Makgoba visited Mandela at the hospital and prayed with Machel 349 while Zuma cancelled a trip to Mozambique to visit him the following day. 350 In September 2013 Mandela was discharged from hospital 351 although his condition remained unstable. 352 After suffering from a prolonged respiratory infection Mandela died on 5 December 2013 at the age of 95 at around 20:50 local time at his home in Houghton surrounded by his family. 353 354 Zuma publicly announced his death on television 353 355 proclaiming ten days of national mourning a memorial service held at Johannesburgs FNB Stadium on 10 December 2013 and 8 December as a national day of prayer and reflection. Mandelas body lay in state from 11 to 13 December at the Union Buildings in Pretoria and a state funeral was held on 15 December in Qunu. 356 357 Approximately 90 representatives of foreign states travelled to South Africa to attend memorial events. 358 It was later revealed that 300 million rand about 20 million dollars originally earmarked for humanitarian development projects had been redirected to finance the funeral. 359 The media was awash with tributes and reminiscences 360 while images of tributes to Mandela proliferated across social media. 361 His US4.1 million estate was left to his widow other family members staff and educational institutions. 362 Political ideology A friend once asked me how I could reconcile my creed of African nationalism with a belief in dialectical materialism. For me there was no contradiction. I was first and foremost an African nationalist fighting for our emancipation from minority rule and the right to control our own destiny. But at the same time South Africa and the African continent were part of the larger world. Our problems while distinctive and special were not unique and a philosophy that placed those problems in an international and historical context of the greater world and the course of history was valuable. I was prepared to use whatever means necessary to speed up the erasure of human prejudice and the end of chauvinistic and violent nationalism. Nelson Mandela 1994 363 Mandela identified as both an African nationalist an ideological position he held since joining the ANC 364 and as a socialist. 365 He was a practical politician rather than an intellectual scholar or political theorist. 366 According to biographer Tom Lodge for Mandela politics has always been primarily about enacting stories about making narratives primarily about morally exemplary conduct and only secondarily about ideological vision more about means rather than ends. 367 The historian Sabelo J. Ndlovu-Gatsheni described Mandela as a liberal African nationalistdecolonial humanist 368 while political analyst Raymond Suttner cautioned against labelling Mandela a liberal and stated that Mandela displayed a hybrid socio-political make-up . 369 Mandela adopted some of his political ideas from other thinkersamong them Indian independence leaders like Gandhi and Nehru African American civil rights activists and African nationalists like Nkrumah and applied them to the South African situation. At the same time he rejected other aspects of their thought such as the anti-white sentiment of many African nationalists. 370 In doing so he synthesised both counter-cultural and hegemonic views for instance by drawing upon ideas from the then-dominant Afrikaner nationalism in promoting his anti-apartheid vision. 371 His political development was strongly influenced by his legal training and practice in particular his hope to achieve change not through violence but through legal revolution . 372 Over the course of his life he began by advocating a path of non-violence later embracing violence and then adopting a non-violent approach to negotiation and reconciliation. 373 When endorsing violence he did so because he saw no alternative and was always pragmatic about it perceiving it as a means to get his opponent to the negotiating table. 374 He sought to target symbols of white supremacy and racist oppression rather than white people as individuals and was anxious not to inaugurate a race war in South Africa. 375 This willingness to use violence distinguishes Mandela from the ideology of Gandhism with which some commentators have sought to associate him. 376 Democracy Although he presented himself in an autocratic manner in several speeches Mandela was a devout believer in democracy and abided by majority decisions even when deeply disagreeing with them. 377 He had exhibited a commitment to the values of democracy and human rights since at least the 1960s. 378 He held a conviction that inclusivity accountability and freedom of speech were the fundamentals of democracy 379 and was driven by a belief in natural and human rights. 380 Suttner argued that there were two modes of leadership that Mandela adopted. On one side he adhered to ideas about collective leadership although on the other believed that there were scenarios in which a leader had to be decisive and act without consultation to achieve a particular objective. 381 According to Lodge Mandelas political thought reflected tensions between his support for liberal democracy and pre-colonial African forms of consensus decision making. 382 He was an admirer of British-style parliamentary democracy 368 stating that I regard the British Parliament as the most democratic institution in the world and the independence and impartiality of its judiciary never fail to arouse my admiration. 368 In this he has been described as being committed to the Euro-North American modernist project of emancipation something which distinguishes him from other African nationalist and socialist leaders like Nyerere who were concerned about embracing styles of democratic governance that were Western rather than African in origin. 368 Mandela nevertheless also expressed admiration for what he deemed to be indigenous forms of democracy describing Xhosa traditional societys mode of governance as democracy in its purest form . 368 Socialism and Marxism 1988 Soviet commemorative stamp captioned Fighter for the freedom of South Africa Nelson Mandela in Russian Mandela advocated the ultimate establishment of a classless society 383 with Sampson describing him as being openly opposed to capitalism private land-ownership and the power of big money . 384 Mandela was influenced by Marxism and during the revolution he advocated scientific socialism . 385 He denied being a communist at the Treason Trial 386 and maintained this stance both when later talking to journalists 387 and in his autobiography where he outlined that the cooperation with the SACP was pragmatic asking rhetorically who is to say that we were not using them? 388 According to the sociologist Craig Soudien sympathetic as Mandela was to socialism a communist he was not. 389 Conversely the biographer David Jones Smith stated that Mandela embraced communism and communists in the late 1950s and early 1960s 390 while the historian Stephen Ellis commented that Mandela had assimilated much of the MarxistLeninist ideology by 1960. 391 Ellis also found evidence that Mandela had been an active member of the South African Communist Party SACP during the late 1950s and early 1960s 118 something that was confirmed after his death by both the ANC and the SACP the latter of which claimed that he was not only a member of the party but also served on its Central Committee. 120 His membership had been hidden by the ANC aware that knowledge of Mandelas former SACP involvement might have been detrimental to his attempts to attract support from Western countries. 392 Mandelas view of these Western governments differed from those of MarxistLeninists for he did not believe that they were anti-democratic or reactionary and remained committed to democratic systems of governance. 393 The 1955 Freedom Charter which Mandela had helped create called for the nationalisation of banks gold mines and land to ensure equal distribution of wealth. 394 Despite these beliefs Mandela initiated a programme of privatisation during his presidency in line with trends in other countries of the time. 395 It has been repeatedly suggested that Mandela would have preferred to develop a social democratic economy in South Africa but that this was not feasible as a result of the international political and economic situation during the early 1990s. 395 This decision was in part influenced by the fall of the socialist states in the Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc during the early 1990s. 396 Personality and personal life Mandela on a visit to Australia in 2009; he is wearing one of the brightly coloured garments that became known as Madiba shirts . Mandela was widely considered a charismatic leader 397 described by biographer Mary Benson as a born mass leader who could not help magnetizing people . 398 He was highly image conscious and throughout his life always sought out fine quality clothes with many commentators believing that he carried himself in a regal manner. 399 His aristocratic heritage was repeatedly emphasised by supporters thus contributing to his charismatic power . 400 While living in Johannesburg in the 1950s he cultivated the image of the African gentleman having the pressed clothes correct manners and modulated public speech associated with such a position. 401 In doing so Lodge argued that Mandela became one of the first media politicians ... embodying a glamour and a style that projected visually a brave new African world of modernity and freedom . 367 Mandela was known to change his clothes several times a day and he became so associated with highly coloured Batik shirts after assuming the presidency that they came to be known as Madiba shirts . 402 403 For political scientists Betty Glad and Robert Blanton Mandela was an exceptionally intelligent shrewd and loyal leader . 404 His official biographer Anthony Sampson commented that he was a master of imagery and performance excelling at presenting himself well in press photographs and producing sound bites. 405 His public speeches were presented in a formal stiff manner and often consisted of cliched set phrases. 406 He typically spoke slowly and carefully chose his words. 407 Although he was not considered a great orator his speeches conveyed his personal commitment charm and humour . 408 Mandela was a private person who often concealed his emotions and confided in very few people. 409 Privately he lived an austere life refusing to drink alcohol or smoke and even as president made his own bed. 410 Renowned for his mischievous sense of humour 411 he was known for being both stubborn and loyal 412 and at times exhibited a quick temper. 413 He was typically friendly and welcoming and appeared relaxed in conversation with everyone including his opponents. 414 A self-described Anglophile he claimed to have lived by the trappings of British style and manners . 415 Constantly polite and courteous he was attentive to all irrespective of their age or status and often talked to children or servants. 416 He was known for his ability to find common ground with very different communities. 417 In later life he always looked for the best in people even defending political opponents to his allies who sometimes thought him too trusting of others. 418 He was fond of Indian cuisine 419 and had a lifelong interest in archaeology 420 and boxing. 421 The significance of Mandela can be considered in two related ways. First he has provided through his personal presence as a benign and honest conviction politician skilled at exerting power but not obsessed with it to the point of view of excluding principles a man who struggled to display respect to all ... Second in so doing he was able to be a hero and a symbol to an array of otherwise unlikely mates through his ability like all brilliant nationalist politicians to speak to very different audiences effectively at once. Bill Freund academic 422 He was raised in the Methodist denomination of Christianity; the Methodist Church of Southern Africa claimed that he retained his allegiance to them throughout his life. 423 On analysing Mandelas writings the theologian Dion Forster described him as a Christian humanist although added that his thought relied to a greater extent on the Southern African concept of Ubuntu than on Christian theology . 424 According to Sampson Mandela never had a strong religious faith however 425 while Elleke Boehmer stated that Mandelas religious belief was never robust . 426 Mandela was very self-conscious about being a man and regularly made references to manhood . 427 He was heterosexual 428 and biographer Fatima Meer said that he was easily tempted by women. 429 Another biographer Martin Meredith characterised him as being by nature a romantic highlighting that he had relationships with various women. 430 Mandela was married three times fathered six children and had seventeen grandchildren and at least seventeen great-grandchildren. 431 He could be stern and demanding of his children although he was more affectionate with his grandchildren. 432 His first marriage was to Evelyn Ntoko Mase in October 1944; 433 they divorced in March 1958 under the multiple strains of his alleged adultery and constant absences devotion to revolutionary agitation and the fact that she was a Jehovahs Witness a religion requiring political neutrality. 434 Mandelas second wife was the social worker Winnie Madikizela-Mandela whom he married in June 1958. 435 They divorced in March 1996. 436 Mandela married his third wife Graca Machel on his 80th birthday in July 1998. 437 Reception and legacy Flowers left at the Mandela statue in Londons Parliament Square following his death By the time of his death within South Africa Mandela was widely considered both the father of the nation 438 and the founding father of democracy . 439 Outside of South Africa he was a global icon 440 with the scholar of South African studies Rita Barnard describing him as one of the most revered figures of our time . 441 One biographer considered him a modern democratic hero . 442 Some have portrayed Mandela in messianic terms 443 in contrast to his own statement that I was not a messiah but an ordinary man who had become a leader because of extraordinary circumstances. 444 He is often cited alongside Mahatma Gandhi and Martin Luther King Jr. as one of the 20th centurys exemplary anti-racist and anti-colonial leaders. 445 Boehmer described him as a totem of the totemic values of our age: toleration and liberal democracy 446 and a universal symbol of social justice . 447 Mandelas international fame emerged during his incarceration in the 1980s when he became the worlds most famous political prisoner a symbol of the anti-apartheid cause and an icon for millions who embraced the ideal of human equality. 252 448 449 450 In 1986 Mandelas biographer characterised him as the embodiment of the struggle for liberation in South Africa. 451 Meredith stated that in becoming a potent symbol of resistance to apartheid during the 1980s he had gained mythical status internationally. 452 Sampson commented that even during his life this myth had become so powerful that it blurs the realities converting Mandela into a secular saint . 453 Within a decade of the end of his presidency Mandelas era was widely thought of as a golden age of hope and harmony 454 with much nostalgia being expressed for it. 455 His name was often invoked by those criticising his successors like Mbeki and Zuma. 456 Across the world Mandela earned international acclaim for his activism in overcoming apartheid and fostering racial reconciliation 410 coming to be viewed as a moral authority with a great concern for truth . 457 Mandelas iconic status has been blamed for concealing the complexities of his life. 458 Mandela generated controversy throughout his career as an activist and politician 459 having detractors on both the right and the radical left. 460 During the 1980s Mandela was widely labelled a terrorist by prominent political figures in the Western world for his embrace of political violence. 461 According to Thatcher for instance the ANC was a typical terrorist organisation . 462 The US governments State and Defense departments officially designated the ANC as a terrorist organisation resulting in Mandela remaining on their terrorism watch-list until 2008. 463 On the left some voices in the ANCamong them Frank B. Wilderson III accused him of selling out for agreeing to enter negotiations with the apartheid government and for not implementing the reforms of the Freedom Charter during his presidency. 464 According to Barnard there is also a sense in which his chiefly bearing and mode of conduct the very respect and authority he accrued in representing his nation in his own person went against the spirit of democracy 459 and concerns were similarly expressed that he placed his own status and celebrity above the transformation of his country. 465 His government would be criticised for its failure to deal with both the HIVAIDS pandemic and the high levels of poverty in South Africa. 459 Orders decorations monuments and honours Main article: List of awards and honours received by Nelson Mandela Over the course of his life Mandela was given over 250 awards accolades prizes honorary degrees and citizenships in recognition of his political achievements. 466 Among his awards were the Nobel Peace Prize 227 the US Presidential Medal of Freedom 467 the Soviet Unions Lenin Peace Prize 466 and the Libyan Al-Gaddafi International Prize for Human Rights . 468 In 1990 India awarded him the Bharat Ratna 469 and in 1992 Pakistan gave him their Nishan-e-Pakistan . 470 The same year he was awarded the Ataturk Peace Award by Turkey; he at first refused the award citing human rights violations committed by Turkey at the time 471 but later accepted the award in 1999. 466 He was appointed to the Order of Isabella the Catholic 472 and the Order of Canada 473 and was the first living person to be made an honorary Canadian citizen . 474 Queen Elizabeth II appointed him as a Bailiff Grand Cross of the Order of St. John and granted him membership in the Order of Merit . 475 In 2004 Johannesburg granted Mandela the Freedom of the City 476 and in 2008 a Mandela statue was unveiled at the spot where Mandela was released from prison. 477 On the Day of Reconciliation 2013 a bronze statue of Mandela was unveiled at Pretorias Union Buildings. 478 In November 2009 the United Nations General Assembly proclaimed Mandelas birthday 18 July as Mandela Day marking his contribution to the anti-apartheid struggle. It called on individuals to donate 67 minutes to doing something for others commemorating the 67 years that Mandela had been a part of the movement. 479 In 2015 the UN General Assembly named the amended Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners as the Mandela Rules to honour his legacy. 480 Subsequently the years 2019 to 2028 were also designated the United Nations Nelson Mandela Decade of Peace. 481 482 Biographies and popular media The first biography of Mandela was based on brief interviews with him that the author Mary Benson had conducted in the 1960s. 483 Two authorised biographies were later produced by friends of Mandela. 484 The first was Fatima Meers Higher Than Hope which was heavily influenced by Winnie and thus placed great emphasis on Mandelas family. 485 The second was Anthony Sampsons Mandela published in 1999. 484 Other biographies included Martin Merediths Mandela first published in 1997 and Tom Lodges Mandela brought out in 2006. 484 Since the late 1980s Mandelas image began to appear on a proliferation of items among them photographs paintings drawings statues public murals buttons t-shirts refrigerator magnets and more 361 items that have been characterised as Mandela kitsch . 486 In the 1980s he was the subject of several songs such as The Specials Free Nelson Mandela Hugh Masekela s Bring Him Back Home Nelson Mandela and Johnny Clegg s Asimbonanga Mandela which helped to bring awareness of his imprisonment to an international audience. 487 Mandela has also been depicted in films on multiple occasions. 488 Some of these such as the 2013 feature film Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom the 2017 miniseries Madiba and the 1996 documentary Mandela have focused on covering his adult life in entirety or until his inaugural as president. Others such as the 2009 feature film Invictus and the 2010 documentary The 16th Man have focused on specific events in his life. 488 Lukhele has argued that in Invictus and other films the America film industry has played a significant part in the crafting of Mandelas global image . 489 See also List of peace activists Mandela effect References Footnotes Mandela used the spelling Rolihlahla. 3 Peter Mtuze notes that the orthography of Xhosa names has changed since the time of Mandelas schooling and that it would now be written Rholihlahla. 4 Mandela . Collins English Dictionary . Archived from the original on 5 April 2016 . Retrieved 17 December 2013 . Mandela 1994 p. 3; Boehmer 2008 p. 21; Smith 2010 p. 17; Sampson 2011 p. 3. See for example official website . Mtuze Peter T 2003. Mandelas Long Walk to Freedom : the isiXhosa translators tall order . Southern African Linguistics and Applied Language Studies . 21 3: 141152. doi : 10.298916073610309486337 . ISSN 1607-3614 . S2CID 143354489 . Archived from the original on 25 July 2022 . Retrieved 25 July 2022 . Benson 1986 p. 16; Mandela 1994 p. 3; Smith 2010 p. 17; Meredith 2010 p. 2; Sampson 2011 p. 3. Mandela 1994 p. 4; Lodge 2006 p. 2; Smith 2010 p. 16. Meer 1988 p. 3; Guiloineau Rowe 2002 p. 23; Meredith 2010 p. 1. Guiloineau Rowe 2002 p. 26. Guiloineau Rowe 2002 p. 26; Lodge 2006 p. 1; Mafela 2008 pp. 102103. Smith 2010 p. 19. Mandela 1994 pp. 89; Smith 2010 pp. 2122; Sampson 2011 p. 4. Mandela 1994 p. 17; Meredith 2010 p. 1. Benson 1986 p. 15; Mandela 1994 pp. 78; Smith 2010 pp. 16 2324; Meredith 2010 pp. 1 3; Sampson 2011 p. 4. Mandela 1994 p. 19. Mandela 1994 p. 15; Meredith 2010 p. 3. Benson 1986 p. 16; Mandela 1994 p. 12; Smith 2010 pp. 2324; Meredith 2010 pp. 2 4. Mandela 1994 pp. 1819; Lodge 2006 p. 3; Smith 2010 p. 24; Meredith 2010 pp. 2 45; Sampson 2011 pp. 5 7; Forster 2014 pp. 9192. Mandela 1994 p. 20; Lodge 2006 p. 3; Smith 2010 p. 25; Meredith 2010 p. 5; Sampson 2011 p. 7. Mandela 1994 pp. 8 20. Benson 1986 p. 17; Meer 1988 p. 4; Mandela 1994 pp. 2225; Lodge 2006 p. 3; Smith 2010 pp. 2627; Meredith 2010 p. 5; Sampson 2011 pp. 79. Meer 1988 p. 7; Mandela 1994 pp. 2729; Meredith 2010 pp. 89. Meer 1988 p. 7; Mandela 1994 p. 25; Smith 2010 p. 27; Meredith 2010 p. 9. Meer 1988 pp. 1112; Mandela 1994 pp. 3134; Lodge 2006 p. 3; Smith 2010 p. 18; Meredith 2010 p. 8. Mandela 1994 p. 43; Meredith 2010 p. 11. Benson 1986 p. 17; Mandela 1994 pp. 3642; Lodge 2006 p. 8; Smith 2010 pp. 2931; Meredith 2010 pp. 911; Sampson 2011 p. 14. Mandela 1994 pp. 4547; Smith 2010 pp. 27 31; Meredith 2010 pp. 1213; Sampson 2011 p. 15. Mandela 1994 pp. 4850. Sampson 2011 p. 17. Mandela 1994 p. 52; Smith 2010 pp. 3132; Meredith 2010 p. 14; Sampson 2011 pp. 1718. Mandela 1994 pp. 5354; Smith 2010 p. 32; Meredith 2010 pp. 1415; Sampson 2011 pp. 1821. Mandela 1994 p. 56; Smith 2010 p. 32; Meredith 2010 p. 15. Mandela 1994 pp. 6265; Lodge 2006 p. 9; Smith 2010 pp. 3334; Meredith 2010 pp. 1518; Sampson 2011 pp. 21 25. Mandela 1994 pp. 6263; Smith 2010 pp. 3334; Meredith 2010 pp. 1719; Sampson 2011 pp. 2425. Mandela 1994 pp. 6769; Smith 2010 p. 34; Meredith 2010 p. 18; Sampson 2011 p. 25. Mandela 1994 p. 68; Lodge 2006 p. 10; Smith 2010 p. 35; Meredith 2010 p. 18; Sampson 2011 p. 25. Mandela 1994 p. 68; Lodge 2006 p. 10; Meredith 2010 p. 18; Forster 2014 p. 93. Sampson 2011 p. 25. Mandela 1994 pp. 7071; Lodge 2006 p. 11; Meredith 2010 p. 19; Sampson 2011 p. 26. Benson 1986 p. 21; Mandela 1994 pp. 7886; Lodge 2006 pp. 1112; Smith 2010 pp. 3435; Meredith 2010 pp. 1920; Sampson 2011 pp. 2627. Benson 1986 p. 21; Mandela 1994 pp. 7376; Lodge 2006 p. 12; Smith 2010 pp. 3639; Meredith 2010 pp. 2022; Sampson 2011 pp. 2728. Benson 1986 p. 23; Meer 1988 pp. 2526; Mandela 1994 pp. 8994; Lodge 2006 pp. 1213; Smith 2010 p. 40; Meredith 2010 pp. 2728; Sampson 2011 pp. 2930. Mandela 1994 pp. 96101; Lodge 2006 pp. 13 1921; Smith 2010 p. 41; Meredith 2010 pp. 2830; Sampson 2011 pp. 3031. Mandela 1994 pp. 104105; Lodge 2006 pp. 22 3132; Smith 2010 pp. 43 48; Meredith 2010 pp. 3132; Sampson 2011 pp. 3233. Mandela 1994 p. 106; Smith 2010 pp. 4849. Mandela 1994 p. 100; Smith 2010 p. 44; Meredith 2010 p. 33; Sampson 2011 p. 34. Benson 1986 p. 23; Meer 1988 p. 26; Mandela 1994 pp. 99 108110; Smith 2010 pp. 4445; Meredith 2010 p. 33; Sampson 2011 p. 33. Mandela 1994 pp. 113116; Lodge 2006 p. 23; Smith 2010 pp. 4546; Sampson 2011 p. 33. Mandela 1994 pp. 118119; Lodge 2006 p. 24; Meredith 2010 p. 33; Sampson 2011 p. 34. Mandela 1994 pp. 116117 119120; Lodge 2006 p. 22; Smith 2010 p. 47; Meredith 2010 pp. 3334; Sampson 2011 p. 33. Mandela 1994 pp. 122 12627; Smith 2010 p. 49; Meredith 2010 p. 34; Sampson 2011 p. 34. Meer 1988 pp. 3334; Mandela 1994 pp. 127131; Smith 2010 pp. 6465; Meredith 2010 pp. 3435; Sampson 2011 pp. 3435. Mandela 1994 pp. 122123; Lodge 2006 pp. 2728; Smith 2010 p. 48; Meredith 2010 p. 44; Sampson 2011 p. 37. Mandela 1994 p. 136; Smith 2010 p. 53; Meredith 2010 pp. 36 43. Mandela 1994 pp. 137139; Lodge 2006 pp. 3334; Smith 2010 p. 53; Meredith 2010 pp. 4243; Sampson 2011 pp. 3839. Benson 1986 p. 31; Meer 1988 pp. 3435; Mandela 1994 pp. 142143; Smith 2010 p. 54. Benson 1986 pp. 2829; Mandela 1994 pp. 139143; Lodge 2006 p. 35; Smith 2010 pp. 5256; Meredith 2010 pp. 4446; Sampson 2011 pp. 3941. Smith 2010 p. inset photographs. Benson 1986 p. 24; Meer 1988 pp. 3940; Mandela 1994 pp. 144 148149; Lodge 2006 pp. 24 25; Smith 2010 pp. 5962; Meredith 2010 p. 47; Sampson 2011 p. 36. Meer 1988 pp. 4041; Mandela 1994 pp. 149 152; Lodge 2006 p. 29; Smith 2010 pp. 6064; Meredith 2010 p. 48; Sampson 2011 p. 36. Meer 1988 p. 40; Mandela 1994 pp. 150 210; Lodge 2006 p. 30; Smith 2010 p. 67; Meredith 2010 p. 48; Sampson 2011 p. 36. Mandela 1994 p. 151; Smith 2010 p. 64; Meredith 2010 pp. 4849. Benson 1986 p. 36; Meer 1988 p. 43; Mandela 1994 pp. 153154; Smith 2010 p. 66; Sampson 2011 p. 48. Mandela 1994 p. 154; Sampson 2011 p. 42. Mandela 1994 pp. 154157; Lodge 2006 p. 37; Smith 2010 p. 66; Sampson 2011 p. 49. Benson 1986 p. 35; Mandela 1994 pp. 159162; Lodge 2006 pp. 4142; Smith 2010 pp. 7072; Meredith 2010 pp. 7678; Sampson 2011 pp. 5152. Benson 1986 pp. 3637; Mandela 1994 pp. 162165; Lodge 2006 p. 44; Smith 2010 pp. 7273; Meredith 2010 pp. 7879; Sampson 2011 pp. 5355. Mandela 1994 p. 165. Smith 2010 pp. 6870; Sampson 2011 p. 35. Benson 1986 p. 26. Mandela 1994 p. 168; Lodge 2006 p. 44; Sampson 2011 pp. 5556. Benson 1986 p. 41; Mandela 1994 p. 176; Lodge 2006 p. 47; Smith 2010 p. 78; Meredith 2010 p. 88; Sampson 2011 pp. 6364. Benson 1986 pp. 3840; Meer 1988 pp. 4849; Mandela 1994 pp. 165167; Smith 2010 pp. 7475; Meredith 2010 pp. 8183; Sampson 2011 pp. 6162. Mandela 1994 p. 176; Smith 2010 p. 78; Sampson 2011 pp. 6364. Benson 1986 p. 42; Meer 1988 p. 55; Lodge 2006 p. 48; Meredith 2010 p. 94. Mandela 1994 pp. 177172; Lodge 2006 pp. 45 47; Smith 2010 pp. 7576; Meredith 2010 p. 87; Sampson 2011 pp. 6465. Mandela 1994 p. 172. Mandela 1994 p. 165; Lodge 2006 p. 53; Smith 2010 p. 77; Meredith 2010 p. 92. Mandela 1994 p. 170; Smith 2010 p. 94; Meredith 2010 p. 103. Benson 1986 pp. 4446; Meer 1988 pp. 5658; Mandela 1994 pp. 182183; Smith 2010 pp. 77 80; Meredith 2010 pp. 8889; Sampson 2011 pp. 6667. Mandela 1994 pp. 183188; Lodge 2006 p. 52 53. Lodge 2006 p. 47. Mandela 1994 pp. 188192; Sampson 2011 p. 68. Benson 1986 p. 51; Mandela 1994 pp. 194195; Lodge 2006 p. 54; Smith 2010 p. 85; Sampson 2011 pp. 7273. Benson 1986 pp. 5051; Mandela 1994 pp. 195198; Lodge 2006 p. 54; Smith 2010 pp. 8384; Meredith 2010 p. 92; Sampson 2011 pp. 7172. Meer 1988 p. 64; Mandela 1994 pp. 199200 204; Smith 2010 p. 86; Sampson 2011 p. 73. Benson 1986 pp. 5859; Meer 1988 p. 60; Mandela 1994 pp. 205207 231; Lodge 2006 p. 58; Meredith 2010 pp. 107108; Smith 2010 pp. 116117; Sampson 2011 pp. 8182 8485. Mandela 1994 pp. 209210; Smith 2010 p. 87; Meredith 2010 p. 95; Sampson 2011 p. 7. Benson 1986 pp. 5457; Meer 1988 p. 61; Mandela 1994 pp. 210216; Lodge 2006 p. 73; Smith 2010 pp. 8793; Meredith 2010 pp. 95101; Sampson 2011 pp. 7780. Lodge 2006 pp. 2829 75. Meredith 2010 pp. 103104; Smith 2010 pp. 9599 105106. Mandela 1994 pp. 293294; Meredith 2010 pp. 104105; Smith 2010 pp. 9899 105106; Sampson 2011 pp. 7677. Benson 1986 p. 66; Sampson 2011 p. 92. Mandela 1994 pp. 218233 234236; Lodge 2006 pp. 5960; Meredith 2010 pp. 114117; Smith 2010 p. 120123; Sampson 2011 pp. 8284. Mandela 1994 pp. 226227; Lodge 2006 p. 60; Meredith 2010 pp. 108109; Smith 2010 p. 118; Sampson 2011 p. 84. Benson 1986 pp. 6467; Meer 1988 pp. 7175; Mandela 1994 pp. 243249; Lodge 2006 pp. 6566; Meredith 2010 pp. 129133; Smith 2010 pp. 118120 125128; Sampson 2011 pp. 8795. Meredith 2010 p. 134. Mandela 1994 pp. 253274; Smith 2010 pp. 130132; Sampson 2011 pp. 9699. Mandela 1994 p. 275; Meredith 2010 p. 147; Sampson 2011 pp. 101102. Meer 1988 pp. 7980; Meredith 2010 pp. 143144; Smith 2010 pp. 100102; Sampson 2011 p. 110. Meer 1988 pp. 7980; Mandela 1994 p. 296; Smith 2010 pp. 102104; Sampson 2011 p. 110. Benson 1986 pp. 7476; Meer 1988 p. 93; Mandela 1994 pp. 306311; Lodge 2006 pp. 7577; Meredith 2010 pp. 144149; Smith 2010 pp. 104 132145; Sampson 2011 pp. 110113. Meredith 2010 pp. 165 186. Benson 1986 pp. 68 7172; Meer 1988 p. 83; Mandela 1994 pp. 283292; Meredith 2010 pp. 136141; Smith 2010 pp. 163164; Sampson 2011 pp. 103106. Mandela 1994 pp. 299305; Meredith 2010 p. 142; Smith 2010 pp. 167168; Sampson 2011 pp. 116117. Mandela 1994 pp. 331334; Meredith 2010 pp. 162 165; Smith 2010 p. 167; Sampson 2011 pp. 122123. Benson 1986 p. 79; Meer 1988 pp. 9092 141143; Mandela 1994 pp. 327330; Meredith 2010 pp. 167168; Smith 2010 pp. 171173; Sampson 2011 pp. 117122. Benson 1986 pp. 8384; Meer 1988 pp. 144147; Mandela 1994 pp. 342346; Lodge 2006 pp. 8182; Meredith 2010 pp. 167170; Smith 2010 pp. 173175; Sampson 2011 pp. 130131. Benson 1986 pp. 8586; Mandela 1994 pp. 347357; Meredith 2010 pp. 172175; Smith 2010 p. 175; Sampson 2011 pp. 132133. Mandela 1994 pp. 357364; Meredith 2010 pp. 176 184; Smith 2010 p. 177; Sampson 2011 pp. 134135. Benson 1986 p. 98; Mandela 1994 pp. 373374; Lodge 2006 pp. 8384; Meredith 2010 pp. 187188; Smith 2010 pp. 183185; Sampson 2011 pp. 140143. Benson 1986 p. 94; Meer 1988 p. 151; Mandela 1994 pp. 377380; Lodge 2006 p. 84; Meredith 2010 pp. 188189; Smith 2010 p. 178; Sampson 2011 p. 143. Benson 1986 p. 99; Mandela 1994 pp. 283287; Meredith 2010 pp. 192193; Smith 2010 pp. 186188 193; Sampson 2011 pp. 144146 154. Mandela 1994 pp. 289291; Smith 2010 pp. 188189; Sampson 2011 pp. 147149. Mandela 1994 pp. 393396; Meredith 2010 pp. 199200; Smith 2010 pp. 206210; Sampson 2011 pp. 150151. Benson 1986 p. 107; Mandela 1994 pp. 397398; Meredith 2010 pp. 197198 200201; Smith 2010 pp. 209214; Sampson 2011 pp. 151154. Smith 2010 pp. 209210; Sampson 2011 p. 151. Benson 1986 p. 107; Mandela 1994 pp. 397409; Lodge 2006 pp. 9293; Meredith 2010 pp. 201204; Smith 2010 pp. 191 222229; Sampson 2011 pp. 154156. a b Ellis 2011 pp. 667668. Ellis 2016 p. 1. a b SACP statement on the passing away of Madiba . South African Communist Party . 6 December 2013. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 29 June 2016 . ; Marrian Natasha 6 December 2013. SACP confirms Nelson Mandela was a member . Business Day . South Africa. Archived from the original on 6 March 2016 . Retrieved 7 December 2013 . Meer 1988 p. 171; Meredith 2010 p. 207. Benson 1986 p. 108; Meer 1988 p. 171; Mandela 1994 pp. 411412; Lodge 2006 p. 90; Meredith 2010 p. 204. Benson 1986 p. 110; Meer 1988 p. 170; Mandela 1994 pp. 413415; Lodge 2006 p. 95; Meredith 2010 p. 206; Smith 2010 pp. 239246; Sampson 2011 pp. 158159. Benson 1986 p. 111; Meer 1988 pp. 171172 176; Mandela 1994 pp. 418425; Lodge 2006 p. 95; Smith 2010 pp. 251254; Benneyworth 2011 p. 81; Sampson 2011 pp. 160162. Meer 1988 pp. 173175; Lodge 2006 p. 97; Meredith 2010 p. 209; Benneyworth 2011 pp. 81 84. Meer 1988 pp. 176177 180; Mandela 1994 pp. 427432; Smith 2010 pp. 255256; Sampson 2011 pp. 163165. Meer 1988 pp. 185194; Mandela 1994 pp. 432440; Meredith 2010 p. 210; Smith 2010 pp. 256259; Sampson 2011 pp. 165167. Benson 1986 p. 114; Meer 1988 pp. 196197; Mandela 1994 pp. 441443; Meredith 2010 pp. 210211; Smith 2010 pp. 259261; Sampson 2011 pp. 167169. Mandela 1994 pp. 443445; Lodge 2006 p. 100; Meredith 2010 p. 211; Smith 2010 pp. 261262; Benneyworth 2011 pp. 9193; Sampson 2011 pp. 169170. Benson 1986 pp. 116117; Meer 1988 pp. 201202; Mandela 1994 pp. 435435; Meredith 2010 pp. 215216; Smith 2010 pp. 275276; Sampson 2011 pp. 170172. Mandela 1994 pp. 278279; Meredith 2010 p. 216; Sampson 2011 p. 172. Meredith 2010 pp. 216217; Sampson 2011 p. 172. Ex-CIA spy admits tip led to Nelson Mandelas long imprisonment . The Guardian . 15 May 2016. Archived from the original on 16 May 2016 . Retrieved 20 May 2016 . Mandela 1994 pp. 456459; Sampson 2011 pp. 172173. Mandela 1994 pp. 463465; Smith 2010 pp. 292293; Sampson 2011 pp. 173174. Benson 1986 pp. 120134; Meer 1988 pp. 210213; Mandela 1994 pp. 468482; Lodge 2006 pp. 104106; Meredith 2010 pp. 218426; Sampson 2011 pp. 174176. Benson 1986 p. 159; Meer 1988 p. 258; Meredith 2010 p. 265; Smith 2010 p. 302; Sampson 2011 p. 193; Broun 2012 p. 74. Nelson Mandela. I am prepared to die . Nelson Mandela Centre of Memory . Nelson Mandela Foundation. Archived from the original on 1 February 2016 . Retrieved 16 December 2013 . Benson 1986 pp. 134137; Meer 1988 pp. 223226; Mandela 2004 pp. 2732; Lodge 2006 pp. 108109; Meredith 2010 pp. 242250; Smith 2010 pp. 292295; Sampson 2011 pp. 183186; Broun 2012 pp. 610 1920. Benson 1986 pp. 138139; Meer 1988 p. 226; Mandela 2004 pp. 3342; Meredith 2010 pp. 252254 256; Sampson 2011 pp. 186190; Broun 2012 pp. 4349. Benson 1986 p. 160; Meer 1988 pp. 232233; Mandela 2004 pp. 4244; Meredith 2010 pp. 252 259. Benson 1986 p. 140; Mandela 2004 pp. 4357; Meredith 2010 pp. 258265; Smith 2010 pp. 298302; Sampson 2011 pp. 191194; Broun 2012 pp. 6875. Mandela 2004 p. 62; Meredith 2010 p. 268; Smith 2010 p. 303; Sampson 2011 pp. 194195; Broun 2012 pp. 102104 107. Benson 1986 pp. 161 163; Mandela 2004 pp. 6368; Meredith 2010 pp. 268272; Smith 2010 p. 306; Sampson 2011 pp. 196197; Broun 2012 pp. 116128. Benson 1986 p. 165; Meer 1988 p. 262; Mandela 2004 pp. 7578; Smith 2010 pp. 307308; Sampson 2011 p. 204. Mandela 2004 pp. 7980; Meredith 2010 p. 279; Sampson 2011 p. 205. Benson 1986 p. 166 182; Meer 1988 p. 266; Mandela 2004 pp. 8284 108116; Meredith 2010 pp. 281283 290291; Sampson 2011 pp. 206207. Benson 1986 p. 174; Mandela 2004 p. 126; Meredith 2010 p. 299; Sampson 2011 pp. 205 258. Benson 1986 p. 169; Mandela 2004 pp. 102108; Meredith 2010 p. 283; Sampson 2011 p. 205. Benson 1986 p. 175; Mandela 2004 pp. 83 90 136138; Lodge 2006 p. 124; Meredith 2010 pp. 284 296298. Meredith 2010 pp. 298299; Sampson 2011 pp. 210214. Lodge 2006 pp. 130131; Meredith 2010 pp. 292295; Sampson 2011 pp. 236241 288294. Meredith 2010 pp. 301 313; Sampson 2011 p. 232. Meredith 2010 pp. 295 299301; Sampson 2011 p. 229. Meredith 2010 pp. 301302; Sampson 2011 p. 221. Meredith 2010 p. 337; Sampson 2011 p. 222. Meredith 2010 p. 334; Sampson 2011 p. 241. Lodge 2006 pp. 142 145; Meredith 2010 pp. 303304; Sampson 2011 pp. 246247. Benson 1986 pp. 192194; Meer 1988 pp. 306307; Meredith 2010 pp. 287288 304310; Sampson 2011 pp. 248254 302. Meredith 2010 p. 301; Sampson 2011 pp. 222 235. Meer 1988 pp. 207208; Sampson 2011 p. 231. Lodge 2006 pp. 127128; Meredith 2010 pp. 308310; Sampson 2011 pp. 223225. Lodge 2006 pp. 128129; Sampson 2011 pp. 226227. Hutton 1994 p. 60. Sampson 2011 p. 228. Sampson 2011 pp. 314315. Meer 1988 p. 268; Lodge 2006 p. 139; Meredith 2010 p. 317; Sampson 2011 pp. 242243. Sampson 2011 pp. 285286. Benson 1986 pp. 186188; Meer 1988 pp. 304306; Meredith 2010 pp. 324327; Sampson 2011 pp. 259276. Lodge 2006 p. 135; Meredith 2010 pp. 327328; Sampson 2011 pp. 277283; Soudien 2015 pp. 363364. Sampson 2011 p. 296. Meer 1988 pp. 313 314; Sampson 2011 pp. 315316. Lodge 2006 p. 155; Meredith 2010 pp. 338339; Sampson 2011 pp. 319320. Barber 2004 p. 24; Sampson 2011 p. 321. Benson 1986 p. 218; Lodge 2006 pp. 147149; Meredith 2010 p. 340; Sampson 2011 pp. 324325. Lodge 2006 p. 148; Meredith 2010 pp. 346347; Sampson 2011 pp. 324325. Meredith 2010 p. 347; Sampson 2011 p. 326. Sampson 2011 pp. 329. Benson 1986 p. 224; Barber 2004 pp. 20 23 2627; Meredith 2010 pp. 341346; Sampson 2011 pp. 335336. Benson 1986 pp. 247248; Barber 2004 p. 30; Lodge 2006 pp. 152153 156; Meredith 2010 pp. 249256; Sampson 2011 pp. 338342. Benson 1986 p. 210; Meredith 2010 p. 340. Benson 1986 pp. 237238; Meer 1988 pp. 315318; Barber 2004 p. 36; Lodge 2006 p. 157; Meredith 2010 pp. 351352; Sampson 2011 pp. 330332. Mandelas response to being offered freedom . ANC. Archived from the original on 22 June 2008 . Retrieved 28 October 2008 . Benson 1986 p. 254; Lodge 2006 pp. 157158; Meredith 2010 p. 358; Sampson 2011 pp. 343345. Meredith 2010 pp. 359360; Sampson 2011 pp. 347355. Sampson 2011 p. 355. Sampson 2011 pp. 354357. Lodge 2006 p. 160; Meredith 2010 pp. 362368; Sampson 2011 pp. 363378. Barber 2004 p. 35; Sampson 2011 p. 368. Meer 1988 pp. 2023; Lodge 2006 pp. 183184; Meredith 2010 pp. 371383; Sampson 2011 pp. 373380. Meer 1988 pp. 318319; Lodge 2006 p. 160; Meredith 2010 p. 369; Sampson 2011 pp. 369370. Meer 1988 p. 320; Lodge 2006 p. 160; Meredith 2010 pp. 369370; Sampson 2011 p. 381. Sampson 2011 pp. 384385 392393. Christopher S. Wren 8 December 1988. Mandela Moved to House at Prison Farm . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 1 May 2013 . Retrieved 13 February 2013 . Barber 2004 p. 41; Lodge 2006 p. 62; Meredith 2010 p. 388; Sampson 2011 p. 386. Lodge 2006 pp. 161162; Meredith 2010 pp. 387388; Sampson 2011 pp. 390392. Barber 2004 pp. 4142; Sampson 2011 pp. 392397. Glad Blanton 1997 p. 567; Barber 2004 p. 1; Lodge 2006 pp. 165166; Meredith 2010 pp. 369397; Sampson 2011 pp. 399402. 1990: Freedom for Nelson Mandela . BBC. 11 February 1990. Archived from the original on 23 October 2012 . Retrieved 28 October 2008 . Sampson 2011 p. 403. Lodge 2006 p. 167; Meredith 2010 pp. 399402; Sampson 2011 p. 407. Ormond Roger 12 February 1990. Mandela free after 27 years . The Guardian . London. Archived from the original on 14 February 2013 . Retrieved 28 October 2008 . Barber 2004 p. 2; Meredith 2010 pp. 400402; Sampson 2011 pp. 408409. The text of Mandelas speech can be found at Nelson Mandelas address to Rally in Cape Town on his Release from Prison . ANC. 11 February 1990. Archived from the original on 28 July 2008 . Retrieved 28 October 2008 . Lodge 2006 p. 171; Meredith 2010 pp. 403405; Sampson 2011 pp. 409410. Barber 2004 pp. 57; Lodge 2006 p. 172; Meredith 2010 pp. 409410; Sampson 2011 pp. 412414. Barber 2004 pp. 5859; Sampson 2011 pp. 415418. Barber 2004 p. 60; Meredith 2010 p. 410; Sampson 2011 p. 420. Barber 2004 p. 60; Sampson 2011 pp. 418420. a b Meredith 2010 pp. 412413; Sampson 2011 pp. 424427. Meredith 2010 p. 439; Sampson 2011 pp. 428429. a b Barber 2004 p. 47; Lodge 2006 p. 173; Meredith 2010 pp. 439440; Sampson 2011 pp. 429430. Meredith 2010 p. 409; Sampson 2011 pp. 431 448. Meredith 2010 pp. 429436 435460; Sampson 2011 pp. 431 448. Tomaselli Tomaselli 2003 p. 6; Lodge 2006 p. 174; Meredith 2010 pp. 418424; Sampson 2011 pp. 436442. Meredith 2010 pp. 425426; Sampson 2011 p. 444. Barber 2004 pp. 45 69; Lodge 2006 pp. 174175; Meredith 2010 pp. 443446; Sampson 2011 pp. 456459. Sampson 2011 p. 460; Meredith 2010 pp. 448 452. Barber 2004 pp. 7273; Lodge 2006 p. 177; Meredith 2010 pp. 462463; Sampson 2011 pp. 461462. Sampson 2011 pp. 462463; Meredith 2010 pp. 466467. Lodge 2006 pp. 177178; Meredith 2010 pp. 467471; Sampson 2011 pp. 463466. Barber 2004 p. 79; Lodge 2006 p. 180; Sampson 2011 pp. 467468. Barber 2004 p. 80; Meredith 2010 pp. 489491; Sampson 2011 p. 472. Barber 2004 p. 46; Meredith 2010 pp. 449450 488; Sampson 2011 pp. 466 470471. Lodge 2006 pp. 180181; Meredith 2010 pp. 476480; Sampson 2011 pp. 468469. Sampson 2011 p. 471. a b Barber 2004 p. 68; Lodge 2006 p. 182; Meredith 2010 p. 494; Sampson 2011 p. 474. Lodge 2006 p. 182; Meredith 2010 p. 497; Sampson 2011 pp. 434445 473. Meredith 2010 p. 495; Sampson 2011 pp. 467477. Barber 2004 pp. 7677; Meredith 2010 pp. 495496; Sampson 2011 p. 478. Sampson 2011 p. 479. Sampson 2011 . Lodge 2006 p. 188; Sampson 2011 pp. 477478; Meredith 2010 p. 484. Meredith 2010 pp. 488489 504510; Sampson 2011 pp. 480489. Meredith 2010 pp. 500501; Sampson 2011 p. 488. Barber 2004 p. 82; Meredith 2010 p. 512; Sampson 2011 p. 491. Levy Glen 15 November 2010. Top 10 Political Prisoners . Time . Archived from the original on 3 April 2013 . Retrieved 25 March 2013 . Meredith 2010 pp. 510512; Sampson 2011 p. 490. Meredith 2010 p. 514; Sampson 2011 pp. 492493. Barber 2004 p. 3; Sampson 2011 pp. 491492. Mandela becomes SAs first black president . BBC. 10 May 1994. Archived from the original on 7 November 2012 . Retrieved 26 May 2008 . Barber 2004 p. 87; Lodge 2006 p. 210; Meredith 2010 p. 566; Sampson 2011 pp. 508511. Meredith 2010 pp. 523 543; Sampson 2011 pp. 496497. Sampson 2011 p. 502. Sampson 2011 pp. 497499 510. Sampson 2011 pp. 501 504. Lodge 2006 p. 209; Meredith 2010 p. 543; Sampson 2011 p. 517. Lodge 2006 pp. 208209; Meredith 2010 pp. 547548; Sampson 2011 pp. 525527. Lodge 2006 p. 186; Meredith 2010 p. 517. Meredith 2010 pp. 539542; Sampson 2011 pp. 500 507. Lodge 2006 pp. 222223; Meredith 2010 pp. 574575; Sampson 2011 pp. 546549. a b Barnard 2014 p. 1. Sampson 2011 p. 524. Lodge 2006 p. 213; Meredith 2010 p. 517; Sampson 2011 pp. 495496. Barber 2004 p. 88; Lodge 2006 p. 204. Sampson 2011 pp. 507511. Sampson 2011 p. 508. a b Lodge 2006 pp. 204205; Meredith 2010 p. 528; Sampson 2011 pp. 511 534. Lodge 2006 p. 212; Meredith 2010 pp. 523524; Sampson 2011 pp. 520 522523. Meredith 2010 pp. 523524; Sampson 2011 pp. 520 522523. Lodge 2006 p. 212; Meredith 2010 pp. 525527; Sampson 2011 pp. 516 524. Mandela rallies Springboks . BBC Sport . 6 October 2003. Archived from the original on 25 February 2013 . Retrieved 28 October 2008 . ; Carlin John 19 October 2007. How Nelson Mandela won the rugby World Cup . The Daily Telegraph . London. Archived from the original on 25 February 2013 . Retrieved 28 October 2008 . Lodge 2006 p. 213; Meredith 2010 pp. 517 536; Sampson 2011 pp. 491 496 524. Meredith 2010 pp. 517 536; Sampson 2011 pp. 491 496 524. Meredith 2010 pp. 527 551564; Sampson 2011 pp. 528532. Meredith 2010 p. 563; Sampson 2011 p. 532. Meredith 2010 pp. 518520. Meredith 2010 p. 519; Sampson 2011 pp. 514515. Barber 2004 pp. 122124 162. Muthien Khosa Magubane 2000 pp. 369370; Meredith 2010 pp. 520521. a b Houston Muthien 2000 p. 62. Lodge 2006 p. 205; Meredith 2010 p. 521. Leatt Annie; Shung-King Maylene Monson Jo. Healing inequalities: The free health care policy PDF . Childrens Institute. Archived from the original PDF on 24 July 2013 . Retrieved 15 May 2011 . Herbst 2003 p. 312. Land Reform Policies in South Africa Compare To Human Rights Internationally PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 31 March 2012 . Retrieved 11 February 2012 . ; No. 3 of 1996: Land Reform Labour Tenants Act 1996 . South African Government Online. 22 March 1996. Archived from the original on 26 February 2013 . Retrieved 26 February 2013 . Barber 2004 pp. 102194. Barber 2004 p. 130. Barber 2004 pp. 135137; Lodge 2006 p. 219; Meredith 2010 pp. 571573. Sampson Anthony 6 July 2003. Mandela at 85 . The Observer . London. Archived from the original on 26 February 2013 . Retrieved 26 May 2008 . ; Can Mandelas AIDS Message Pierce the Walls of Shame? . Peninsula Peace and Justice Center. 9 January 2005. Archived from the original on 26 February 2013 . Retrieved 26 May 2008 . ; Quist-Arcton Ofeibea 19 July 2003. South Africa: Mandela Deluged With Tributes as He Turns 85 . AllAfrica . Archived from the original on 26 February 2013 . Retrieved 26 May 2008 . Meredith 2010 p. 573; Sampson 2011 pp. 510 56568. Barber 2004 pp. 137138. Meredith 2010 pp. 544547; Sampson 2011 p. 510. Barber 2004 p. 131; Meredith 2010 p. 573; Sampson 2011 pp. 510 56568. Barber 2004 p. 133. Barber 2004 p. 89; Lodge 2006 p. 214. Sampson 2011 p. 555. Sampson 2011 p. 559. Sampson 2011 pp. 560561. Barber 2004 pp. 107108. Lodge 2006 p. 216; Sampson 2011 pp. 561567. Barber 2004 pp. 104105; Sampson 2011 p. 560. a b Lodge 2006 p. 214. a b Sampson 2011 pp. 562563. Sampson 2011 p. 564. Barber 2004 p. 144; Lodge 2006 pp. 215216; Sampson 2011 pp. 563564. Analysis: Lockerbies long road . BBC. 31 January 2001. Archived from the original on 9 July 2013 . Retrieved 26 May 2008 . Barber 2004 pp. 124125; Sampson 2011 pp. 556557. Barber 2004 pp. 108110; Lodge 2006 p. 215; Sampson 2011 pp. 556557. Barber 2004 pp. 176177; Lodge 2006 p. 216; Sampson 2011 p. 558. Lodge 2006 pp. 217218. Barber 2004 pp. 111113; Sampson 2011 pp. 558559. Remembering the moment that SA soldiers marched into Lesotho - The Mail Guardian . 19 September 2018. Archived from the original on 11 November 2022 . Retrieved 11 November 2022 . Muthien Khosa Magubane 2000 p. 366. Barber 2004 pp. 128129; Lodge 2006 p. 204; Meredith 2010 pp. 529530; Sampson 2011 p. 534. Sampson 2011 p. 535. Barber 2004 pp. 128129. Lodge 2006 p. 207; Sampson 2011 p. 536. a b Lodge 2006 p. 211. Barber 2004 p. 130; Lodge 2006 p. 211. Lodge 2006 p. 211; Meredith 2010 p. 568; Sampson 2011 pp. 537543. Meredith 2010 p. 568; Sampson 2011 pp. 537543. Meredith 2010 p. 576; Sampson 2011 pp. 549551. Sampson 2011 pp. 551552. Sampson 2011 p. 578. Lodge 2006 p. 219. Meredith 2010 p. 576; Battersby 2011 pp. 587588. Meredith 2010 p. 576; Battersby 2011 pp. 588589. Lodge 2006 pp. 219220; Meredith 2010 pp. 584586; Battersby 2011 pp. 590591. a b Battersby 2011 p. 598. Mandela responding well to treatment . BBC News . 15 August 2001. Archived from the original on 24 July 2013 . Retrieved 26 May 2008 . Battersby 2011 pp. 589590. Tebas Pablo 13 July 2000. Closing Ceremony . The Body. Archived from the original on 8 May 2013 . Retrieved 25 February 2013 . Hogg Chris 15 July 2004. Mandela urges action to fight TB . BBC News . Archived from the original on 18 July 2004. Nolen Stephanie 5 December 2013. Mandela arrived late to the fight against HIV-AIDS . The Globe and Mail . Toronto. Archived from the original on 18 April 2017 . Retrieved 11 May 2017 . Weir Keith 13 April 2003. Equipo Nizkor Mandela slams Western action in Kosovo Iraq . Derechos.org. Reuters. Archived from the original on 14 May 2019 . Retrieved 3 October 2010 . Murphy Jarrett 30 January 2003. Mandela Slams Bush on Iraq . CBS News. Archived from the original on 15 January 2016 . Retrieved 13 December 2013 . Battersby 2011 pp. 591592. Pienaar John 1 September 2002. Mandela warns Bush over Iraq . BBC. Archived from the original on 25 February 2013 . Retrieved 27 October 2008 . ; Fenton Tom 30 January 2003. Mandela Slams Bush on Iraq . CBS. Archived from the original on 25 February 2013 . Retrieved 26 May 2008 . Battersby 2011 p. 593. Meredith 2010 p. 593; Battersby 2011 p. 598. a b Keyes Allison 17 May 2005. Mandela Bush Discuss Education AIDS in Africa . NPR. Archived from the original on 6 December 2013. a b Hennessey Kathleen. The Obama-Mandela dynamic reflected in a photo . Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on 26 June 2013. Battersby 2011 p. 594. Battersby 2011 p. 600; Mandela joins Elders on turning 89 . NBC News . Associated Press. 20 July 2007. Archived from the original on 25 February 2013 . Retrieved 26 May 2008 . ; Mandela launches The Elders . SAinfo. 19 July 2007. Archived from the original on 25 February 2013 . Retrieved 27 October 2008 . Bingham John 6 May 2008. Hyde Park concert to mark Mandelas 90th . The Independent . Archived from the original on 9 November 2012 . Retrieved 27 October 2008 . a b Meredith 2010 p. 598; Battersby 2011 pp. 594597. World Cup perfect gift for SA . BBC News . 11 May 2004. Archived from the original on 16 March 2016 . Retrieved 13 September 2016 . Battersby 2011 p. 600. Batty David 11 July 2010. Nelson Mandela attends World Cup closing ceremony . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 24 July 2013. Polgreen Lydia 24 May 2013. Messy Fight Over Mandela Trust Goes Public . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 28 January 2017 . Retrieved 13 September 2016 . Smith David 3 July 2013. South African courts step in over Mandela family burial row . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 9 July 2013 . Retrieved 13 September 2016 . ; Moreton Cole 2 July 2013. Nelson Mandelas grandson Mandla accused of grave tampering . The Telegraph . Archived from the original on 27 January 2016 . Retrieved 13 September 2016 . Battersby 2011 p. 607. Nelson Mandela breathing on his own . News 24 . 18 January 2011. Archived from the original on 13 May 2013 . Retrieved 30 January 2011 . Nelson Mandela has lung infection . BBC News . 11 December 2012. Archived from the original on 28 December 2017 . Retrieved 16 December 2017 . Mandela Has Surgery for Gallstones . The New York Times . 15 December 2012. Archived from the original on 30 January 2013 . Retrieved 15 December 2012 . Nelson Mandela 94 responding positively to treatment in hospital . CTV News . 28 March 2013. Archived from the original on 19 April 2016 . Retrieved 10 June 2013 . Nelson Mandela arrives home in ambulance . The Telegraph . London. 6 April 2013. Archived from the original on 8 April 2013 . Retrieved 6 April 2013 . Nelson Mandela hospitalized in serious condition . CNN. 8 June 2013. Archived from the original on 14 December 2020 . Retrieved 8 June 2013 . AFP 2 26 June 2013. Mandela wished a peaceful end by Cape Town Archbishop . The Telegraph . Archived from the original on 27 January 2016 . Retrieved 5 July 2013 . cite news : CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list link Nelson Mandela condition worsens as Zuma cancels trip . BBC News . 27 June 2013. Archived from the original on 26 January 2014 . Retrieved 27 June 2013 . Nelson Mandela released from hospital . CNN. 1 September 2013. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 1 September 2013 . Mandela discharged from South Africa hospital . Al Jazeera. 1 September 2013. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 1 September 2013 . a b South Africas Nelson Mandela dies in Johannesburg . BBC News . 5 December 2013. Archived from the original on 15 April 2016 . Retrieved 5 December 2013 . Nelson Mandela dies . Mail Guardian . 5 December 2013. Archived from the original on 19 July 2018 . Retrieved 6 May 2018 . Polgreen Lydia 5 December 2013. Mandelas Death Leaves South Africa Without Its Moral Center . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 6 December 2013 . Retrieved 5 December 2013 . Pillay Verashni 6 December 2013. Mandelas memorial service to be held on December 10 . Mail Guardian . Archived from the original on 1 October 2022 . Retrieved 6 December 2013 . Vecchiatto Paul; Stone Setumo; Magubane Khulekani 6 December 2013. Nelson Mandela to be laid to rest on December 15 . Business Day . South Africa. Archived from the original on 6 December 2013 . Retrieved 6 December 2013 . Mount Harry 9 December 2013. Nelson Mandela: the long goodbye . The Telegraph . London. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 11 December 2013 . Nelson Mandela funeral: Millions misspent . BBC News . 4 December 2017. Archived from the original on 4 December 2017 . Retrieved 4 December 2017 . Ndlovu-Gatsheni 2014 p. 917. a b Nelson 2014 p. 130. Dixon Robyn 3 February 2014. Nelson Mandela leaves 4.1-million estate to family staff schools . Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on 27 January 2016. Mandela 1994 p. 173. Benson 1986 pp. 25 232; Lodge 2006 p. 220; Meredith 2010 p. 241; Sampson 2011 pp. 37 584. Benson 1986 pp. 231232; Smith 2010 p. 231. Boehmer 2008 p. 13; Barnard 2014 p. 14. a b Lodge 2006 p. ix. a b c d e Ndlovu-Gatsheni 2014 p. 907. Suttner 2007 p. 122. Boehmer 2008 p. 109. Boehmer 2008 p. 102. Lodge 2006 p. viii. Boehmer 2008 p. 107. Boehmer 2008 pp. 105 108. Ndlovu-Gatsheni 2014 p. 914. Suttner 2007 pp. 119120. Sampson 2011 p. 433. Ndlovu-Gatsheni 2014 pp. 906907. Battersby 2011 p. 605. Kalumba 1995 p. 162. Suttner 2007 pp. 113114. Lodge 2006 p. xi. Benson 1986 pp. 231 232; Ellis 2016 p. 7. Sampson 2011 p. 298. Sampson 2011 p. 282. Mandela 1994 p. 365; Sampson 2011 pp. 135138. Benson 1986 p. 232. Ellis 2016 p. 18. Soudien 2015 p. 361. Smith 2010 pp. 217218. Ellis 2016 p. 7. Ellis 2016 p. 17. Smith 2010 p. 231. Kalumba 1995 pp. 164165. a b Freund 2014 p. 294. Sampson 2011 pp. 433435. Glad Blanton 1997 p. 570; Read 2010 p. 326. Benson 1986 p. 51. Sampson 2011 pp. 432 554. Lodge 2006 p. 2. Boehmer 2008 p. 111. Boehmer 2008 p. 133; Meredith 2010 p. 495; Sampson 2011 p. 503. Khumalo Fred 5 August 2004. How Mandela changed SA fashion . BBC. Archived from the original on 3 December 2012 . Retrieved 28 October 2008 . Glad Blanton 1997 p. 577. Sampson 2011 pp. 582583. Boehmer 2008 pp. 128 134. Glad Blanton 1997 p. 576. Barber 2004 p. 87. Suttner 2007 p. 119; Meredith 2010 pp. xvxvi. a b Meredith 2010 p. xvi. Battersby 2011 p. 599. Meredith 2010 p. xvi; Sampson 2011 p. 583. Glad Blanton 1997 p. 582; Meredith 2010 p. xvi. Sampson 2011 pp. 411 498. Glad Blanton 1997 p. 581; Ndlovu-Gatsheni 2014 p. 907. Meredith 2010 pp. xvi 482483. Barnard 2014 pp. 56. Sampson 2011 pp. 431 582. Meredith 2010 p. 164. Meer 1988 p. 189. Lodge 2006 p. 29. Freund 2014 p. 295. Forster 2014 p. 89. Forster 2014 pp. 106107. Sampson 2011 p. 65. Boehmer 2008 p. 86. Suttner 2014 p. 342. Boehmer 2008 p. 142. Meer 1988 p. 78. Meredith 2010 p. 21. The Life and Times of Nelson Mandela: Genealogy . Nelson Mandela Foundation. Archived from the original on 16 January 2016 . Retrieved 13 July 2016 . Meredith 2010 p. 481; Smith 2010 p. 147; Sampson 2011 p. 246. Mandela 1994 pp. 144 148149; Smith 2010 pp. 5962; Sampson 2011 p. 36. Mandela 1994 p. 296; Smith 2010 pp. 102104; Sampson 2011 p. 110. Benson 1986 pp. 7476; Meer 1988 p. 93; Mandela 1994 pp. 306311; Meredith 2010 pp. 144149; Smith 2010 pp. 104 132145; Sampson 2011 pp. 110113. Meredith 2010 pp. 539542; Sampson 2011 p. 500. Meredith 2010 pp. xvii 576; Sampson 2011 pp. 549551. Nelson Mandela to spend Christmas in S Africa hospital . BBC News . 24 December 2012. Archived from the original on 29 January 2013 . Retrieved 13 July 2016 . Meredith 2010 p. 565. Barnard 2014 pp. 1 2; Ndlovu-Gatsheni 2014 p. 906. Barnard 2014 pp. 1 2. Lodge 2006 p. 225. Suttner 2007 pp. 125126. Meredith 2010 p. 599; Barnard 2014 p. 4. Boehmer 2008 p. 82; Ndlovu-Gatsheni 2014 p. 918. Boehmer 2008 p. 16. Boehmer 2008 p. 1. Hooper Simon. The worlds most famous political prisoner . Al Jazeera. Archived from the original on 29 June 2021 . Retrieved 29 June 2021 . Nelson Mandelas letters detail his 27 years as the worlds most famous political prisoner . Los Angeles Times . 13 July 2018. Archived from the original on 28 June 2021 . Retrieved 29 June 2021 . Mandela death: How a prisoner became a legend . BBC News . 7 December 2013. Archived from the original on 29 June 2021 . Retrieved 29 June 2021 . Benson 1986 p. 13. Meredith 2010 p. xv. Sampson 2011 p. xxvi. Meredith 2010 p. 599. Freund 2014 p. 296. Mangcu 2013 p. 101. Sampson 2011 p. 582. Suttner 2016 p. 17. a b c Barnard 2014 p. 2. Boehmer 2008 p. 173. Boehmer 2005 p. 46. Sampson 2011 p. 360. Windrem Robert 7 December 2013. US government considered Nelson Mandela a terrorist until 2008 . NBC News. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Barnard 2014 p. 2; Ndlovu-Gatsheni 2014 p. 918. Ndlovu-Gatsheni 2014 p. 918. a b c How the awards have just kept flooding in . The Cape Times . 18 July 2012. President Honors Recipients of the Presidential Medal of Freedom . The White House. 9 July 2002. Archived from the original on 7 May 2013 . Retrieved 26 October 2008 . Prizes: And the Winner Is ... Time . 8 May 1989. Archived from the original on 22 October 2010 . Retrieved 24 October 2012 . List of all Bharat Ratna award winners . NDTV. 21 January 2011. Archived from the original on 11 March 2013 . Retrieved 14 February 2013 . Mandela in Pakistan . The Independent . London: Independent Print Limited. 3 October 1992. Archived from the original on 24 March 2013 . Retrieved 7 June 2010 . Statement on the Ataturk Award given to Nelson Mandela . African National Congress. 12 April 1992. Archived from the original on 1 October 2006 . Retrieved 2 January 2007 . Royal Decree 2701999 12th February 1999 . Spanish Official State Gazette . 13 February 1999. Archived from the original on 13 September 2017 . Retrieved 13 September 2017 . Canada presents Nelson Mandela with the Queen Elizabeth II Diamond Jubilee medal . Queens Printer for Canada. 23 August 2012. Archived from the original on 2 May 2013 . Retrieved 14 February 2013 . Mandela to be honoured with Canadian citizenship . CBC News. 19 November 2001. Archived from the original on 23 June 2013 . Retrieved 26 October 2008 . The Order of Merit . Royal Insight. November 2002. Archived from the original on 5 January 2005 . Retrieved 26 October 2008 . Madiba conferred freedom of Johannesburg . Gauteng Provincial Government. 27 July 2004. Archived from the original on 21 June 2008 . Retrieved 26 October 2008 . Stern Jennifer 27 August 2008. Long walk immortalised in bronze . Media Club South Africa. Archived from the original on 24 July 2013 . Retrieved 30 November 2009 . Nelson Mandela statue unveiled in Pretoria by Zuma . BBC News . 16 December 2013. Archived from the original on 19 December 2013 . Retrieved 23 December 2013 . Battersby 2011 p. 601; UN gives backing to Mandela Day . BBC News . 11 November 2009. Archived from the original on 29 August 2013 . Retrieved 11 November 2009 . Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners from the United Nations General Assembly Report. United Nations. 29 September 2015. p. 6. Archived from the original on 30 September 2020 . Retrieved 18 July 2018 . Ods Home Page PDF . Archived PDF from the original on 23 December 2022 . Retrieved 23 December 2022 . Nelson Mandela International Day . Archived from the original on 18 December 2022 . Retrieved 23 December 2022 . Lodge 2006 p. 8. a b c Lodge 2006 p. vii. Lodge 2006 pp. vii 1314. Nelson 2014 p. 138. Lynskey Dorian 6 December 2013. Nelson Mandela: The Triumph of the Protest Song . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 9 February 2017 . Retrieved 23 January 2017 . a b Bromley 2014 p. 41. Lukhele 2012 p. 289. Bibliography Barber James 2004. Mandelas World: The International Dimension of South Africas Political Revolution 199099 . Athens OH: Ohio University Press. ISBN 978-0-8214-1566-5 . Barnard Rita 2014. Introduction . In Rita Barnard ed.. The Cambridge Companion to Nelson Mandela . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 126. ISBN 978-1-107-01311-7 . Battersby John 2011. Afterword: Living Legend Living Statue . In Anthony Sampson ed.. Mandela: The Authorised Biography . London: HarperCollins. pp. 587610. ISBN 978-0-00-743797-9 . Benneyworth Garth 2011. Armed and Trained: Nelson Mandelas 1962 Military Mission as Commander in Chief of Umkhonto we Sizwe and Provenance for his Buried Makarov Pistol . South African Historical Journal . 63 1: 78101. doi : 10.108002582473.2011.549375 . S2CID 144616007 . Benson Mary 1986. Nelson Mandela . Harmondsworth: Penguin Books. ISBN 978-0-14-008941-7 . Boehmer Elleke 2005. Postcolonial Terrorist: The Example of Nelson Mandela . Parallax . 11 4: 4655. doi : 10.108013534640500331666 . S2CID 144267205 . Archived from the original on 12 January 2021 . Retrieved 27 August 2020 . Boehmer Elleke 2008. Nelson Mandela: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-280301-6 . Bromley Roger 2014. Magic Negro Saint or Comrade: Representations of Nelson Mandela in Film . Altre Modernita 12: 4058. Broun Kenneth S. 2012. Saving Nelson Mandela: The Rivonia Trial and the Fate of South Africa . Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-974022-2 . Ellis Stephen 2011. The Genesis of the ANCs Armed Struggle in South Africa 19481961 . Journal of Southern African Studies . 37 4: 657676. doi : 10.108003057070.2011.592659 . hdl : 226319620 . S2CID 144061623 . Ellis Stephen 2016. Nelson Mandela the South African Communist Party and the origins of Umkhonto we Sizwe . Cold War History . 16 1: 118. doi : 10.108014682745.2015.1078315 . S2CID 155994044 . Forster Dion 2014. Mandela and the Methodists: Faith Fallacy and Fact . Studia Historiae Ecclesiasticae . 40 : 87115. Freund Bill 2014. The Shadow of Nelson Mandela 19182013 . African Political Economy . 41 140: 292296. doi : 10.108003056244.2014.883111 . S2CID 153570087 . Glad Betty ; Blanton Robert 1997. F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela: A Study in Cooperative Transformational Leadership . Presidential Studies Quarterly . 27 3: 565590. JSTOR 27551769 . Guiloineau Jean; Rowe Joseph 2002. Nelson Mandela: The Early Life of Rolihlahla Madiba . Berkeley: North Atlantic Books. pp. 926 . ISBN 978-1-55643-417-4 . Herbst Jeffrey 2003. The Nature of South African Democracy: Political Dominance and Economic Inequality . In Theodore K. Rabb; Ezra N. Suleiman eds.. The Making and Unmaking of Democracy: Lessons from History and World Politics . London: Routledge. pp. 206224. ISBN 978-0-415-93381-0 . Houston Gregory; Muthien Yvonne 2000. Democracy and Governance in Transition . In Yvonne Muthien; Meshack Khosa; Bernard Magubane eds.. Democracy and Governance Review: Mandelas Legacy 19941999 . Pretoria: Human Sciences Research Council Press. pp. 3768. ISBN 978-0-7969-1970-0 . Hutton Barbara 1994. Robben Island: Symbol of Resistance . Bellville: Pearson South Africa. ISBN 978-0-86877-417-6 . Kalumba Kibujjo M. 1995. The Political Philosophy of Nelson Mandela: A Primer . Journal of Social Philosophy . 26 3: 161171. doi : 10.1111j.1467-9833.1995.tb00092.x . Landau Paul Stuart. Spear: Mandela and the Revolutionaries Ohio University Press 2022 online review of this book Lodge Tom 2006. Mandela: A Critical Life . Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0-19-921935-3 . Lukhele Francis 2012. Post-Prison Nelson Mandela: A Made-in-America Hero . Canadian Journal of African Studies . 46 2: 289301. doi : 10.108000083968.2012.702088 . S2CID 142631031 . Mafela Munzhedzi James 2008. The Revelation of African Culture in Long Walk to Freedom . In Anna Haebich; Frances Peters-Little; Peter Read eds.. Indigenous Biography and Autobiography . Sydney: Humanities Research Centre Australian National University. pp. 99107. Archived from the original on 24 July 2013 . Retrieved 15 June 2013 . Mandela Nelson 1994. Long Walk to Freedom Volume I: 19181962 . Little Brown and Company. ISBN 978-0-7540-8723-6 . Mandela Nelson 2004 1994. Long Walk to Freedom Volume II: 19621994 large print ed.. London: BBC AudioBooks and Time Warner Books Ltd. ISBN 978-0-7540-8724-3 . Mangcu Xolela 2013. Retracing Nelson Mandela through the Lineage of Black Political Thought . Transition . 112 112: 101116. doi : 10.2979transition.112.101 . S2CID 150631478 . Meer Fatima 1988. Higher than Hope: The Authorized Biography of Nelson Mandela . London: Hamish Hamilton. ISBN 978-0-241-12787-2 . Meredith Martin 2010. Mandela: A Biography . New York: PublicAffairs. ISBN 978-1-58648-832-1 . Muthien Yvonne; Khosa Meshack; Magubane Bernard 2000. Democracy and Governance in Transition . In Yvonne Muthien; Meshack Khosa; Bernard Magubane eds.. Democracy and Governance Review: Mandelas Legacy 19941999 . Pretoria: Human Sciences Research Council Press. pp. 361374. ISBN 978-0-7969-1970-0 . Ndlovu-Gatsheni Sabelo J. 2014. From a Terrorist to Global Icon: A Critical Decolonial Ethical Tribute to Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela of South Africa . Third World Quarterly . 35 6: 905921. doi : 10.108001436597.2014.907703 . S2CID 144338285 . Nelson Steven 2014. Nelson Mandelas Two Bodies . Transition . 116 116: 130142. doi : 10.2979transition.116.130 . S2CID 154241514 . Read James H. 2010. Leadership and power in Nelson Mandelas Long Walk to Freedom . Journal of Power . 3 3: 317339. doi : 10.108017540291.2010.524792 . S2CID 143804607 . Sampson Anthony 2011 1999. Mandela: The Authorised Biography . London: HarperCollins. ISBN 978-0-00-743797-9 . Smith David James 2010. Young Mandela . London: Weidenfeld Nicolson. ISBN 978-0-297-85524-8 . Soudien Crain 2015. Nelson Mandela Robben Island and the Imagination of a New South Africa . Journal of Southern African Studies . 41 2: 353366. doi : 10.108003057070.2015.1012915 . S2CID 143225875 . Suttner Raymond 2007. MisUnderstanding Nelson Mandela . African Historical Review . 39 2: 107130. doi : 10.108017532520701786202 . S2CID 218645921 . Suttner Raymond 2014. Nelson Mandelas Masculinities . African Identities . 12 34: 342356. doi : 10.108014725843.2015.1009623 . S2CID 145448829 . Suttner Raymond 2016. I Was Not Born With a Hunger to Be Free: Nelson Mandelas Early Journeys towards Political Awareness . Journal of Asian and African Studies . 51 1: 1731. doi : 10.11770021909614541973 . S2CID 144447985 . Tomaselli Keyan ; Tomaselli Ruth 2003. The Media and Mandela . Safundi: The Journal of South African and American Studies . 4 2: 110. doi : 10.108017533170300404204 . S2CID 144534323 . External links Nelson Mandela at Wikipedias sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Nelson Mandela Centre of Memory Nelson Mandela Childrens Fund Nelson Mandela Foundation archived Mandela Rhodes Foundation The Elders Nelson Mandela Museum Nelson Mandela Day archived Nelson Mandelas family tree Nelson Mandela at Curlie Nelson Mandela at IMDb Appearances on C-SPAN Nelson Mandela on Nobelprize.org Political offices Preceded by F. W. de Klerk as State President of South Africa President of South Africa 19941999 Succeeded by Thabo Mbeki Party political offices Preceded by Oliver Tambo President of the African National Congress 19911997 Succeeded by Thabo Mbeki Diplomatic posts Preceded by Andres Pastrana Arango Secretary General of Non-Aligned Movement 19981999 Succeeded by Thabo Mbeki v t e Nelson Mandela 18 July 1918 5 December 2013 President of South Africa 19941999 President of the African National Congress 19911997 Life Early life Mandela and Tambo law firm UMkhonto we Sizwe 1955 Congress of the People Freedom Charter Treason Trial Rivonia Trial Robben Island Pollsmoor Prison Victor Verster Prison Negotiations to end apartheid in South Africa Liliesleaf Farm Mandela House and museum Nelson Mandela Childrens Fund The Elders 70th Birthday Tribute 90th Birthday Tribute Awards and honours Death and state funeral state memorial service attendees funeral attendees Presidency 1994 election Presidency Government of National Unity Reconstruction and Development Programme Truth and Reconciliation Commission Constitution of South Africa 1995 Rugby World Cup Intervention in Lesotho Mahlamba Ndlopfu Books and speeches I Am Prepared to Die 1964 speech Long Walk to Freedom 1994 Mandela: The Authorised Biography 1999 Conversations With Myself 2010 Dare Not Linger: The Presidential Years 2017 Legacy and namesakes Mandela Day Nelson Mandela Forum Nelson Mandela Institution 46664 concerts Mandela Rhodes Scholarship Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners the Mandela Rules Nelson Mandela Challenge Nelson Mandela Challenge Plate Nelson Mandela Invitational Nelson Mandela International Airport Nelson Mandela Square Nelson Mandela Bay Metropolitan Municipality Mandela National Stadium Nelson Mandela Bridge Nelson Mandela Childrens Hospital Ponts Nelson-Mandela Nelson Mandela University Film depictions Mandela 1987 Death of Apartheid 1995 Mandela 1996 Mandela: Son of Africa Father of a Nation 1996 Mandela and de Klerk 1997 Goodbye Bafana 2007 Endgame 2009 Invictus 2009 Winnie Mandela 2011 Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom 2013 Mandelas Gun 2016 Family Ngubengcuka great-grandfather Gadla Henry Mphakanyiswa father Nosekeni Fanny mother Evelyn Mase wife Winnie Madikizela-Mandela wife Graca Machel wife Makgatho Mandela son Makaziwe Mandela daughter Zenani Mandela-Dlamini daughter Zindzi Mandela daughter Ndileka Mandela granddaughter Mandla Mandela grandson Zoleka Mandela granddaughter Ndaba Mandela grandson Related African National Congress history International Tribute Concert Madiba shirt Free Nelson Mandela song Mandela Day song Rise Up song Bring Him Back Home Nelson Mandela song Nelson Mandela EP Atlanta sculpture Cape Town City Hall statue Johannesburg statue London statue Pretoria statue Washington D.C. statue Ismail Ayob Category Articles related to Nelson Mandela v t e African National Congress Leaders President John Langalibalele Dube 19121917 Sefako Makgatho 19171924 Zacharias Richard Mahabane 19241927 Josiah Tshangana Gumede 19271930 Pixley ka Isaka Seme 19301936 Zacharias Richard Mahabane 19371940 Alfred Bitini Xuma 19401949 James Moroka 19491952 Albert Luthuli 19521967 Oliver Tambo 19671991 Nelson Mandela 19911997 Thabo Mbeki 19972007 Jacob Zuma 20072017 Cyril Ramaphosa 2017present Deputy President Walter Rubusana 19121936 Nelson Mandela 19521958 Oliver Tambo 19581985 Nelson Mandela 19851991 Walter Sisulu 19911994 Thabo Mbeki 19941997 Jacob Zuma 19972007 Kgalema Motlanthe 20072012 Cyril Ramaphosa 20122017 David Mabuza 20172022 Paul Mashatile 2022present Secretary-General Sol Plaatje 19121915 Selope Thema 19151917 Saul Msane 19171919 Horatio L. Bud-Mbelle 19191923 TD Mweli Skota 19231927 E. J. Khaile 19271930 Elijah Mdolomba 19301936 James Calata 19361949 Walter Sisulu 19491955 Oliver Tambo 19551958 Duma Nokwe 19581969 Alfred Baphethuxolo Nzo 19691991 Cyril Ramaphosa 19911997 Kgalema Motlanthe 19972007 Gwede Mantashe 20072017 Ace Magashule 20172022 Fikile Mbalula 2022present National Conferences Morogoro 1969 48th 1991 49th 1994 50th 1997 51st 2002 52nd 2007 53rd 2012 54th 2017 55th 2022 Structure and wings National Working Committee National Executive Committee Provincial Executive Committees ANC Womens League ANC Youth League ANC Veterans League Luthuli House ANC Today History Defiance Campaign Congress of the People Freedom Charter Rivonia Trial Little Rivonia Trial uMkhonto we Sizwe Radio Freedom Solomon Mahlangu Freedom College Operation Vula Bisho massacre Shell House massacre Allied organisations Congress of South African Trade Unions South African Communist Party Category v t e Heads of State of South Africa Monarch 19101961 George V Edward VIII George VI Elizabeth II State President 19611994 under Apartheid Charles Robberts Swart Eben Donges Tom Naude Jim Fouche Jan de Klerk Nico Diederichs Marais Viljoen John Vorster Marais Viljoen P. W. Botha F. W. de Klerk President from 1994 post-Apartheid Nelson Mandela 1994-1999 Thabo Mbeki 1999-2008 Ivy Matsepe-Casaburri Kgalema Motlanthe 2008-2009 Jacob Zuma 2009-2018 Cyril Ramaphosa 2018-present Died in office Acting President v t e Chairs of the Non-Aligned Movement Tito Nasser Kaunda Boumediene Gopallawa Jayewardene F. Castro Reddy Singh Mugabe Drnovsek Jovic Mesic Kostic Cosic Suharto Samper Pastrana Mandela Mbeki Mahathir Abdullah F. Castro R. Castro Mubarak Tantawi Morsi Ahmadinejad Rouhani Maduro Aliyev v t e First Mandela Cabinet 19941996 President Nelson Mandela Deputy Presidents F. W. de Klerk Thabo Mbeki Ministers Kader Asmal Sibusiso Bengu Pik Botha Mangosuthu Buthelezi Dawie de Villiers Alec Erwin Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi Derek Hanekom Pallo Jordan Derek Keys Chris Liebenberg Penuell Maduna Mac Maharaj Trevor Manuel John Mavuso Tito Mboweni Patrick McKenzie Membathisi Mdladlana Roelf Meyer Joe Modise Mohammed Valli Moosa Sankie Mthembi-Nkondo Lionel Mtshali Sydney Mufamadi Sipo Mzimela Jay Naidoo Ben Ngubane Kraai van Niekerk Alfred Nzo Dullah Omar Jeff Radebe Stella Sigcau Zola Skweyiya Joe Slovo Steve Tshwete Abe Williams Nkosazana Zuma v t e Second Cabinet of Nelson Mandela 19961999 President Nelson Mandela Deputy President Thabo Mbeki Ministers Derek Hanekom Agriculture and Land Affairs Ben Ngubane 19961997 1999 Lionel Mtshali 19971999 Arts and Culture Jay Naidoo Communications Mohammed Valli Moosa Constitutional Development and Provincial Affairs Sipo Mzimela 19961998 Ben Skosana 19981999 Correctional Services Joe Modise Defence Sibusiso Bengu Education Pallo Jordan Environmental Affairs and Tourism Trevor Manuel Finance Alfred Nzo Foreign Affairs Nkosazana Zuma Health Mangosuthu Buthelezi Home Affairs Sankie Mtembi-Nkondo Housing Dullah Omar Justice Tito Mboweni 19961998 Membathisi Mdladlana 19981999 Labour Penuell Maduna Minerals and Energy Stella Sigcau Public Enterprises Zola Skweyiya Public Service and Administration Jeff Radebe Public Works Sydney Mufamadi Safety and Security Steve Tshwete Sport and Recreation Alec Erwin Trade and Industry Mac Maharaj Transport Kader Asmal Water Affairs and Forestry Geraldine Fraser-Moleketi Welfare v t e Laureates of the Nobel Peace Prize 19011925 1901 : Henry Dunant Frederic Passy 1902: Elie Ducommun Charles Gobat 1903: Randal Cremer 1904: Institut de Droit International 1905: Bertha von Suttner 1906: Theodore Roosevelt 1907: Ernesto Moneta Louis Renault 1908: Klas Arnoldson Fredrik Bajer 1909: A. M. F. Beernaert Paul Estournelles de Constant 1910: International Peace Bureau 1911: Tobias Asser Alfred Fried 1912: Elihu Root 1913: Henri La Fontaine 1914 1915 1916 1917: International Committee of the Red Cross 1918 1919: Woodrow Wilson 1920: Leon Bourgeois 1921: Hjalmar Branting Christian Lange 1922: Fridtjof Nansen 1923 1924 1925: Austen Chamberlain Charles Dawes 19261950 1926: Aristide Briand Gustav Stresemann 1927: Ferdinand Buisson Ludwig Quidde 1928 1929: Frank B. Kellogg 1930: Nathan Soderblom 1931: Jane Addams Nicholas Butler 1932 1933: Norman Angell 1934: Arthur Henderson 1935: Carl von Ossietzky 1936: Carlos Saavedra Lamas 1937: Robert Cecil 1938: Nansen International Office for Refugees 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944: International Committee of the Red Cross 1945: Cordell Hull 1946: Emily Balch John Mott 1947: Friends Service Council American Friends Service Committee 1948 1949: John Boyd Orr 1950: Ralph Bunche 19511975 1951: Leon Jouhaux 1952: Albert Schweitzer 1953: George C. Marshall 1954: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 1955 1956 1957: Lester B. Pearson 1958: Georges Pire 1959: Philip Noel-Baker 1960: Albert Luthuli 1961: Dag Hammarskjold 1962: Linus Pauling 1963: International Committee of the Red Cross League of Red Cross Societies 1964 : Martin Luther King Jr. 1965 : UNICEF 1966 1967 1968 : Rene Cassin 1969 : International Labour Organization 1970 : Norman Borlaug 1971 : Willy Brandt 1972 1973: Le uc Tho declined award Henry Kissinger 1974: Sean MacBride Eisaku Sato 1975: Andrei Sakharov 19762000 1976: Betty Williams Mairead Corrigan 1977: Amnesty International 1978: Anwar Sadat Menachem Begin 1979: Mother Teresa 1980: Adolfo Perez Esquivel 1981: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 1982: Alva Myrdal Alfonso Garcia Robles 1983: Lech Waesa 1984: Desmond Tutu 1985: International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War 1986: Elie Wiesel 1987: Oscar Arias 1988: UN Peacekeeping Forces 1989: Tenzin Gyatso 14th Dalai Lama 1990: Mikhail Gorbachev 1991: Aung San Suu Kyi 1992: Rigoberta Menchu 1993: Nelson Mandela F. W. de Klerk 1994: Shimon Peres Yitzhak Rabin Yasser Arafat 1995: Pugwash Conferences Joseph Rotblat 1996: Carlos Belo Jose Ramos-Horta 1997: International Campaign to Ban Landmines Jody Williams 1998: John Hume David Trimble 1999: Medecins Sans Frontieres 2000: Kim Dae-jung 2001present 2001 : United Nations Kofi Annan 2002 : Jimmy Carter 2003 : Shirin Ebadi 2004 : Wangari Maathai 2005 : International Atomic Energy Agency Mohamed ElBaradei 2006 : Grameen Bank Muhammad Yunus 2007 : Al Gore Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 2008 : Martti Ahtisaari 2009 : Barack Obama 2010 : Liu Xiaobo 2011 : Ellen Johnson Sirleaf Leymah Gbowee Tawakkol Karman 2012 : European Union 2013 : Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons 2014 : Kailash Satyarthi Malala Yousafzai 2015 : Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet 2016 : Juan Manuel Santos 2017 : International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons 2018 : Denis Mukwege Nadia Murad 2019 : Abiy Ahmed 2020 : World Food Programme 2021 : Maria Ressa Dmitry Muratov 2022 : Ales Bialiatski Memorial Center for Civil Liberties 2023 : Narges Mohammadi 2024 : Nihon Hidankyo v t e 1993 Nobel Prize laureates Chemistry Kary B. Mullis United States Michael Smith Canada Literature 1993 Toni Morrison United States Peace Nelson Mandela South Africa Frederik Willem de Klerk South Africa Physics Russell Alan Hulse United States Joseph Hooton Taylor Jr. United States Physiology or Medicine Richard J. Roberts United Kingdom Phillip A. Sharp United States Economic Sciences Robert Fogel United States Douglass North United States Nobel Prize recipients 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 v t e Gandhi Peace Prize laureates Julius Nyerere 1995 A. T. Ariyaratne 1996 Gerhard Fischer 1997 Ramakrishna Mission 1998 Baba Amte 1999 Grameen Bank Nelson Mandela 2000 John Hume 2001 Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan 2002 Vaclav Havel 2003 Coretta Scott King 2004 Desmond Tutu 2005 Chandi Prasad Bhatt 2013 ISRO 2014 Vivekananda Kendra 2015 Akshaya Patra Foundation and Sulabh International 2016 Ekal Vidyalaya 2017 Yohei Sasakawa 2018 Qaboos bin Said 2019 Sheikh Mujibur Rahman 2020 Gita Press 2021 v t e Laureates of the Prince or Princess of Asturias Award for International Cooperation Prince of Asturias Award for International Cooperation 1981: Jose Lopez Portillo 1982: Enrique V. Iglesias 1983: Belisario Betancur 1984: Contadora group 1985: Raul Alfonsin 1986: University of Salamanca and University of Coimbra 1987: Javier Perez de Cuellar 1988: Oscar Arias 1989: Jacques Delors and Mikhail Gorbachev 1990: Hans-Dietrich Genscher 1991: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees UNHCR 1992: Frederik W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela 1993: United Nations Blue Berets stationed in Ex-Yugoslavia 1994: Yitzhak Rabin and Yasser Arafat 1995: Mario Soares 1996: Helmut Kohl 1997: Government of Guatemala and the Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity 1998: Emma Bonino Olayinka Koso-Thomas Graca Machel Fatiha Boudiaf Rigoberta Menchu Fatana Ishaq Gailani and Somaly Mam 1999: Pedro Duque John Glenn Chiaki Mukai and Valeri Polyakov 2000: Fernando Henrique Cardoso 2001: International Space Station 2002: The Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research 2003: Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva 2004: The European Unions Erasmus Programme 2005: Simone Veil 2006: Bill Melinda Gates Foundation 2007: Al Gore 2008: Manhica Centre of Health Research Mozambique Ifakara Health Institute Tanzania Malaria Research and Training Centre Mali and Kintampo Health Research Centre Ghana 2009: World Health Organization 2010: The Transplantation Society and the Spanish National Transplant Organization 2011: Bill Drayton 2012: International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement 2013: Max Planck Society for the Advancement of Science 2014: Fulbright Program Princess of Asturias Award for International Cooperation 2015: Wikipedia 2016: United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement 2017: The Hispanic Society of America 2018: Amref Health Africa 2019: Salman Khan and the Khan Academy 2020: Gavi the Vaccine Alliance 2021: Camfed Campaign for Female Education 2022: Ellen MacArthur 2023: Drugs for Neglected Diseases Initiative DNDi 2024: Organization of Ibero-American States for Education Science and Culture OEI v t e The Elders Chair Mary Robinson Deputy Chairs Ban Ki-moon Graca Machel Members Gro Harlem Brundtland Helen Clark Elbegdorj Tsakhia Zeid Raad Al Hussein Hina Jilani Ellen Johnson Sirleaf Ricardo Lagos Juan Manuel Santos Ernesto Zedillo Former Members Martti Ahtisaari Kofi Annan former chair Ela Bhatt Lakhdar Brahimi Fernando Henrique Cardoso Jimmy Carter Li Zhaoxing Nelson Mandela founder Aung San Suu Kyi Muhammad Yunus Desmond Tutu former chair v t e Time Persons of the Year 19271950 Charles Lindbergh 1927 Walter Chrysler 1928 Owen D. Young 1929 Mohandas Gandhi 1930 Pierre Laval 1931 Franklin D. Roosevelt 1932 Hugh S. Johnson 1933 Franklin D. Roosevelt 1934 Haile Selassie 1935 Wallis Simpson 1936 Chiang Kai-shek Soong Mei-ling 1937 Adolf Hitler 1938 Joseph Stalin 1939 Winston Churchill 1940 Franklin D. Roosevelt 1941 Joseph Stalin 1942 George Marshall 1943 Dwight D. Eisenhower 1944 Harry S. Truman 1945 James F. Byrnes 1946 George Marshall 1947 Harry S. Truman 1948 Winston Churchill 1949 The American Fighting-Man 1950 19511975 Mohammed Mosaddeq 1951 Elizabeth II 1952 Konrad Adenauer 1953 John Foster Dulles 1954 Harlow Curtice 1955 Hungarian Freedom Fighters 1956 Nikita Khrushchev 1957 Charles de Gaulle 1958 Dwight D. Eisenhower 1959 U.S. Scientists: George Beadle Charles Draper John Enders Donald A. Glaser Joshua Lederberg Willard Libby Linus Pauling Edward Purcell Isidor Rabi Emilio Segre William Shockley Edward Teller Charles Townes James Van Allen Robert Woodward 1960 John F. Kennedy 1961 Pope John XXIII 1962 Martin Luther King Jr. 1963 Lyndon B. Johnson 1964 William Westmoreland 1965 The Generation Twenty-Five and Under 1966 Lyndon B. Johnson 1967 The Apollo 8 Astronauts : William Anders Frank Borman Jim Lovell 1968 The Middle Americans 1969 Willy Brandt 1970 Richard Nixon 1971 Henry Kissinger Richard Nixon 1972 John Sirica 1973 King Faisal 1974 American Women: Susan Brownmiller Kathleen Byerly Alison Cheek Jill Conway Betty Ford Ella Grasso Carla Hills Barbara Jordan Billie Jean King Susie Sharp Carol Sutton Addie Wyatt 1975 19762000 Jimmy Carter 1976 Anwar Sadat 1977 Deng Xiaoping 1978 Ayatollah Khomeini 1979 Ronald Reagan 1980 Lech Waesa 1981 The Computer 1982 Ronald Reagan Yuri Andropov 1983 Peter Ueberroth 1984 Deng Xiaoping 1985 Corazon Aquino 1986 Mikhail Gorbachev 1987 The Endangered Earth 1988 Mikhail Gorbachev 1989 George H. W. Bush 1990 Ted Turner 1991 Bill Clinton 1992 The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat F. W. de Klerk Nelson Mandela Yitzhak Rabin 1993 Pope John Paul II 1994 Newt Gingrich 1995 David Ho 1996 Andrew Grove 1997 Bill Clinton Ken Starr 1998 Jeff Bezos 1999 George W. Bush 2000 2001present Rudolph Giuliani 2001 The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper Coleen Rowley Sherron Watkins 2002 The American Soldier 2003 George W. Bush 2004 The Good Samaritans: Bono Bill Gates Melinda Gates 2005 You 2006 Vladimir Putin 2007 Barack Obama 2008 Ben Bernanke 2009 Mark Zuckerberg 2010 The Protester 2011 Barack Obama 2012 Pope Francis 2013 Ebola Fighters : Dr. Jerry Brown Dr. Kent Brantly Ella Watson-Stryker Foday Gollah Salome Karwah 2014 Angela Merkel 2015 Donald Trump 2016 The Silence Breakers 2017 The Guardians: Jamal Khashoggi Maria Ressa Wa Lone Kyaw Soe Oo Staff of The Capital 2018 Greta Thunberg 2019 Joe Biden Kamala Harris 2020 Elon Musk 2021 Volodymyr Zelenskyy Spirit of Ukraine 2022 Taylor Swift 2023 v t e Arthur Ashe Courage Award winners Named after Arthur Ashe 1993: Valvano 1994: Palermo 1995: Cosell 1996: Claiborne 1997: Ali 1998: D. Smith 1999: King 2000: Sanders 2001: Freeman 2002: Flight 93 passengers Beamer Bingham Burnett Glick 2003: P. Tillman K. Tillman 2004: Weah 2005: MacLaren Yeboah 2006: Ahmad Kohestani 2007: Cullen Ringland 2008: Carlos T. Smith 2009: Mandela 2010: Thomas 2011: Bozella 2012: Summitt 2013: Roberts 2014: Sam 2015: Jenner 2016: Dobson 2017: Shriver 2018: USA Gymnastics sex abuse scandal survivors; ibnlt : Biles Dantzscher Denhollander Douglas Maroney Nichols Raisman Wieber 2019: Russell 2020: Love 2021: Moore 2022: Klitschko 2023: USWNST 2024: Gleason v t e Order of Mapungubwe Platinum Nelson Mandela Oliver Tambo Albert Luthuli Gold Allan Cormack F. W. de Klerk Basil Schonland Sydney Brenner J. M. Coetzee Aaron Klug Frank Nabarro Doris Lessing Mangena Mokone Zwelakhe Sisulu Edna Molewa Silver Percy Amoils George Ellis Lionel Opie Patricia Berjak Claire Penn Sibusiso Sibisi Valerie Mizrahi Wieland Gevers Phuti Ngoepe Tim Noakes Pragasen Pillay Hendrik J. Koornhof Bongani Mayosi Johann Lutjeharms Douglas Butterworth Pieter Steyn Barry Schoub Bernie Fanaroff George Ekama Glenda Gray Malegapuru Makgoba Ismail Mohamed Hendrik Simon Schaaf William Soga Fulufhelo Nelwamondo Siyabulela Xuza Malik Maaza Ari Sitas Aboubaker Ebrahim Dangor Vhahangwele Masindi Bronze Peter Beighton Hamilton Naki Tshilidzi Marwala Daya Reddy Tebello Nyokong Himla Soodyall Monique Zaahl Patience Mthunzi-Kufa Quarraisha Abdool Karim Namrita Lall Thokozani Majozi v t e Ibrahim Prize recipients Joaquim Chissano Nelson Mandela 2007 Festus Mogae 2008 no award 2009-2010 Pedro Pires 2011 no award 2012-2013 Hifikepunye Pohamba 2014 no award 2015-2016 Ellen Johnson Sirleaf 20172018 v t e Time 100: The Most Important People of the 20th Century Leaders revolutionaries David Ben-Gurion Winston Churchill Mahatma Gandhi Mikhail Gorbachev Adolf Hitler Ho Chi Minh Pope John Paul II Ruhollah Khomeini Martin Luther King Jr. Vladimir Lenin Nelson Mandela Mao Zedong Ronald Reagan Eleanor Roosevelt Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Margaret Sanger Margaret Thatcher Unknown Tiananmen Square rebel Lech Waesa Artists entertainers Louis Armstrong Lucille Ball The Beatles Marlon Brando Coco Chanel Charlie Chaplin Le Corbusier Bob Dylan T. S. Eliot Aretha Franklin Martha Graham Jim Henson James Joyce Pablo Picasso Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein Bart Simpson Frank Sinatra Steven Spielberg Igor Stravinsky Oprah Winfrey Builders titans Stephen Bechtel Sr. Leo Burnett Willis Carrier Walt Disney Henry Ford Bill Gates Amadeo Giannini Ray Kroc Estee Lauder William Levitt Lucky Luciano Louis B. Mayer Charles E. Merrill Akio Morita Walter Reuther Pete Rozelle David Sarnoff Juan Trippe Sam Walton Thomas J. Watson Jr. Scientists thinkers Leo Baekeland Tim Berners-Lee Rachel Carson Albert Einstein Philo Farnsworth Enrico Fermi Alexander Fleming Sigmund Freud Robert H. Goddard Kurt Godel Edwin Hubble John Maynard Keynes Leakey family Jean Piaget Jonas Salk William Shockley Alan Turing Francis Crick James Watson Ludwig Wittgenstein Wright brothers Heroes icons Muhammad Ali The American G.I. Lady Diana Spencer Anne Frank Billy Graham Che Guevara Edmund Hillary Tenzing Norgay Helen Keller Kennedy family Bruce Lee Charles Lindbergh Harvey Milk Marilyn Monroe Emmeline Pankhurst Rosa Parks Pele Jackie Robinson Andrei Sakharov Mother Teresa Bill W. Portals : Biography Freedom of speech Socialism South Africa Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Romania Portugal Netherlands Norway Taiwan Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz People Trove Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef NARA SNAC Te Papa New Zealand Retrieved from https:en.wikipedia.orgwindex.php?titleNelsonMandelaoldid1248063468 Categories : Nelson Mandela 1918 births 2013 deaths 20th-century Methodists 20th-century philanthropists 20th-century South African lawyers 20th-century South African male writers 20th-century South African politicians 21st-century Methodists 21st-century South African philanthropists 21st-century South African politicians African and Black nationalists Alumni of the University of London Alumni of University of London Worldwide Anti-capitalists Bailiffs Grand Cross of the Order of St John Burials in South Africa Collars of the Order of Isabella the Catholic Congressional Gold Medal recipients Respiratory disease deaths in South Africa Infectious disease deaths in South Africa Deaths from respiratory tract infection Grand Commanders of the Order of the Federal Republic South African HIVAIDS activists Honorary companions of the Order of Australia Honorary companions of the Order of Canada Honorary companions of the Order of the Star of Ghana Honorary members of the Order of Merit Honorary Kings Counsel Inmates of Robben Island Recipients of the Lenin Peace Prize Members of the National Assembly of South Africa Members of the South African Communist Party Nobel Peace Prize laureates People acquitted of treason People from King Sabata Dalindyebo Local Municipality Political prisoners Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients Presidents of the African National Congress Presidents of South Africa Recipients of the Bharat Ratna Recipients of the Gandhi Peace Prize Recipients of the Order of Prince Yaroslav the Wise 1st class Saboteurs Sakharov Prize laureates Secretaries-general of the Non-Aligned Movement South African anti-apartheid activists South African autobiographers South African Marxist writers South African Methodists South African nationalists South African Nobel laureates South African prisoners and detainees South African revolutionaries South African socialists UMkhonto we Sizwe personnel University of Fort Hare alumni University of South Africa alumni University of the Witwatersrand alumni World Rugby Hall of Fame inductees Xhosa people International Simon Bolivar Prize recipients 20th-century presidents in Africa Hidden categories: Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Featured articles Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use South African English from June 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in South African English Use dmy dates from July 2023 Pages using embedded infobox templates with the title parameter Articles with hAudio microformats Pages with Xhosa IPA Articles containing Afrikaans-language text Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with Curlie links People appearing on C-SPAN Nobelprize template using Wikidata property P8024 This page was last edited on 27 September 2024 at 12:55 UTC . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view