Pablo Escobar - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Donate Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 1 Early life Toggle Early life subsection 1.1 Childhood and youth 2 Criminal career Toggle Criminal career subsection 2.1 Early 2.2 Medellin Cartel 2.3 Rise to prominence 2.4 Escobars political career 2.5 War against drugs and narcoterrorism 2.6 War between drug cartels 2.7 1989 offensive and failed negotiations 2.7.1 La Catedral prison 3 Death 4 Aftermath of his death Toggle Aftermath of his death subsection 4.1 Virginia Vallejos testimony 4.1.1 Role in the Palace of Justice siege 4.2 Relatives 4.3 Hacienda Napoles 4.4 Escobar Inc 4.5 Hippos 4.6 Apartment demolition 5 Personal life Toggle Personal life subsection 5.1 Family and relationships 5.2 Properties 6 In popular culture Toggle In popular culture subsection 6.1 Books 6.2 Films 6.3 Television 6.4 Music 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Pablo Escobar 94 languages Afrikaans Asturianu Azrbaycanca Ban-lam-gu Bikol Central Catala Cestina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Espanol Esperanto Euskara Francais Gaeilge Gaidhlig Galego Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Islenska Italiano Kiswahili Latina Latviesu Letzebuergesch Lietuviu Magyar Malagasy Malti Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmal Norsk nynorsk Occitan Ozbekcha Polski Portugues Romana Scots Shqip Simple English Slovencina Slovenscina srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Svenska Thuja Turkce Veneto Tieng Viet Zemaiteska Tolsi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia Colombian drug lord 19491993 This article is about the Colombian drug lord. For other uses see Pablo Escobar disambiguation . In this Spanish name the first or paternal surname is Escobar and the second or maternal family name is Gaviria . Pablo Escobar Escobar in a 1976 mugshot Born Pablo Emilio Escobar Gaviria 1949-12-01 1 December 1949 Rionegro Colombia Died 2 December 1993 1993-12-02 aged 44 Medellin Colombia Cause of death Gunshot wound to the head Resting place Monte Sacro Cemetery Spouse Maria Victoria Henao m. 1976 Children Sebastian Marroquin Manuela Parents Abel de Jesus Escobar Echeverri 1 2 Hermilda de los Dolores Gaviria Berrio 3 4 Relatives Jose Obdulio Gaviria Gustavo Gaviria Other names El Patron The Boss Don Pablo Sir Pablo El Padrino The Godfather El Diablo The Devil Paisa Robin Hood Organization Medellin cartel Convictions Illegal drug trade assassinations bombing bribery racketeering murder Criminal penalty Five years imprisonment Signature Pablo Emilio Escobar Gaviria s k b r ; Spanish: palo eskoa ; 1 December 1949 2 December 1993 was a Colombian drug lord narcoterrorist and politician who was the founder and sole leader of the Medellin Cartel . 5 6 Dubbed the king of cocaine Escobar was one of the wealthiest criminals in history having amassed an estimated net worth of US30 billion by the time of his deathequivalent to 70 billion as of 2022while his drug cartel monopolized the cocaine trade into the United States in the 1980s and early 1990s. 7 8 Born in Rionegro into a peasant family and raised in Medellin Escobar studied briefly at Universidad Autonoma Latinoamericana of Medellin but left without graduating; he instead began engaging in criminal activity selling illegal cigarettes and fake lottery tickets as well as participating in motor vehicle theft . In the early 1970s he began to work for various smugglers. In 1976 forming alliances with Gonzalo Rodriguez Gacha Carlos Lehder and Jorge Luis Ochoa and his clan Escobar founded the Medellin Cartel which distributed powder cocaine. He also established the first smuggling routes from Peru Bolivia and Ecuador through Colombia and into the United States. Escobars infiltration into the U.S. created exponential demand for cocaine and by the 1980s it was estimated Escobar led monthly shipments of 70 to 80 tons of cocaine into the country from Colombia controlling more than 80 of the worlds production of the drug and 60 of the illicit market in the United States. 9 As a result Escobar amassed an immense fortune which amounted to around eight billion dollars between assets and cash; according to Forbes for seven consecutive years he was one of the richest people in the world. 7 10 11 12 13 In the 1982 Colombian parliamentary election to excuse his immeasurable capital Escobar was elected as an alternate member of the Chamber of Representatives as part of the Liberal Party . Through this he was responsible for community projects such as the construction of houses and football fields which gained him popularity among the locals of the towns that he frequented; however Escobars political ambitions were thwarted by the Colombian and U.S. governments constantly battled rival cartels domestically and abroad leading to massacres and the murders of police officers judges locals and prominent politicians. 14 who routinely pushed for his arrest with Escobar widely believed to have orchestrated the Avianca Flight 203 and DAS Building bombings in retaliation. In 1989 after several attempts at negotiation multiple kidnappings and selective assassinations of judges and public officials the Medellin Cartel with Escobar at its helm declared total war against the governement. 15 16 Escobar organized and financed an extensive army of hitmen who assassinated key figures for the Colombian institutionality such as the liberal leader Luis Carlos Galan and perpetrated indiscriminate terrorist acts such as the use of car bombs in Columbias main cities. This campaign of narcoterrorism destabilized the country and made Escobar the most wanted criminal in the world at the beginning of the nineties. 17 18 Escobar was responsible for the murder of 657 police officers between 1989 and 1993 19 20 21 and fierce clashes against the Cali Cartel 22 23 the Magdalena Medio Antioquia paramilitary groups and Los Pepes . In 1991 after the consummation of the National Constituent Assembly which gave Colombia a new constitution and the prohibition of the extradition of nationals Escobar surrendered to authorities and was sentenced to five years imprisonment on multiple charges; however he struck a deal of no extradition with Colombian President Cesar Gaviria along with the ability to be housed in his self-built prison La Catedral . In 1992 when authorities attempted to move Escobar to a more standard holding facility after confirming that he had continued to commit crimes while imprisoned Escobar escaped and went into hiding leading to a nationwide manhunt. 24 As a result the Medellin Cartel crumbled and in 1993 Escobar was killed in his hometown by Colombian National Police a day after his 44th birthday. 25 Escobars legacy remains controversial; while many denounce the heinous nature of his crimes he was seen as a Robin Hood -like figure for many in Colombia as he provided many amenities to the poor. His killing was mourned and his funeral attended by over 25 000 people. 26 Additionally his private estate Hacienda Napoles has been transformed into a theme park. 27 His life has also served as inspiration for or has been dramatized widely in film television and in music. Early life The city of Medellin where Escobar grew up and began his criminal career Pablo Emilio Escobar Gaviria was born on 1 December 1949 in the small village of El Tablazo near Rionegro Antioquia Department . He belonged to the Paisa ethnic subgroup. His family was of Spanish origin specifically from the Basque Country and also had Italian roots. 28 He was the second of seven children and grew up in poverty . His father was a small farmer and his mother was a teacher and his siblings in order of birth were Roberto de Jesus El Osito 29 Gloria Ines 30 Argemiro 31 Alba Marina 32 Luz Maria 33 and Luis Fernando the latter born in 1958 and murdered at the age of 19 in 1977. 34 Escobars maternal grandfather Roberto Gaviria Cobaleda had already preceded him in illegal activities as he was a renowned whiskey smuggler at a time when it was illegal early 20th century. 35 36 Gaviria Cobaleda was also the grandfather of the Colombian lawyer and politician Jose Obdulio Gaviria. 37 Well my family did not have significant financial resources and we lived through difficulties like those experienced by the majority of Colombian people so we are not oblivious to these problems we know them deeply and we understand them. Pablo Escobar 38 However his ancestors and immediate family members stood out as politicians businessmen ranchers and figures of the Antioquian elite 39 therefore his widely publicized popular origins would not correspond to reality. Among his extensive family members is Isabel Gaviria Duque First Lady of the Nation wife of Carlos E. Restrepo who was President of Colombia between 1910 and 1914. Pablo Escobars godfather was the renowned Colombian diplomat and intellectual Joaquin Vallejo Arbelaez . His death is kept in the parish of Rionegro which reads: In the parish of San Nicolas de Rionegro on December 4 1949 Father Juan M. Gomez baptized a child who was born on the first day of the present whom he named PABLO EMILIO legitimate son of Abel de Jesus Escobar and Hermilda Gaviria residents of this parish. Paternal grandparents: Pablo Emilio Escobar and Sara Maria Echeverri. Maternal grandparents: Roberto Gaviria and Ines Berrio. Godparents: Joaquin Vallejo and Nelly Mejia de Vallejo who were advised of their spiritual relationship and obligations. I attest. Agustin Gomez. Priest. MARGINAL NOTE OF CONFIRMATION. Confirmed in the Minor Basilica by His Excellency Mr. Alfonso Uribe Jaramillo on October 21 1952. Godfather: Gustavo Gaviria. I attest. Juan M. Gomez Priest. MARGINAL NOTE OF MARRIAGE. He was married in Palmira Valle parish of La Stma. Trinidad on March 29 1976. Witnesses: Alfonso Hurtado and Dolores de Vallejo. He married Victoria E. Henao. I attest to this. Monsignor Samuel Alvarez Botero. Childhood and youth According to his mother Escobar began to show insight and cunning as early as elementary school; and at the beginning of high school another of his qualities became evident: his leadership over his classmates. Escobar and his cousin Gustavo Gaviria Rivero did small businesses at the Lucrecio Jaramillo Velez high school where they both studied. They held raffles exchanged comics sold exams and lent money at low interest. In this way Pablo Escobar began to develop his ability for business and commerce. Escobar left high school in 1966 just before his 17th birthday before returning two years later with his cousin Gustavo Gaviria. At this time the hard life on the streets of Medellin had polished them into gangster bullies in the eyes of teachers. The two dropped out of school after more than a year but Escobar did not give up. Having forged a high school diploma he was admitted to study at the Faculty of Economics of the Latin American Autonomous University of Medellin where several of his Gaviria cousins were studying including Jose Obdulio with the goal of becoming a criminal lawyer a politician and eventually the president but had to give up because of lack of money. Escobar preferred to dedicate himself to his personal businesses. As a curious fact he always felt self-conscious about his short stature 1.65 m and this made him wear special shoes with heels to make himself look taller. 40 41 42 43 Criminal career See also: Illegal drug trade in Colombia Illegal drug trade in Panama and Illegal drug trade in the Bahamas Early Escobar started his criminal career with his gang by with small scams thefts and after stealing tombstones sandblasting their inscriptions and reselling them. After dropping out of college Escobar began to join gangs to steal cars. 44 Escobar soon became involved in violent crime employing criminals to kidnap people who owed him money and demand ransoms sometimes tearing up ransom notes even when Escobar had received the ransom. His most famous kidnapping victim was businessman Diego Echavarria Misas who was kidnapped and eventually killed in the summer of 1971 Escobar received a 50 000 ransom from the Echavarria family; his gang became well known for this kidnapping. 45 46 Escobar would repeat the same process with drug lord Fabio Restrepo kidnapping and murdering him in 1975. 47 48 After Escobar would later begin to work for Alfredo Gomez Lopez Don Capone the king of smuggling in Colombia. 49 Escobar soon entered the drug trade by smuggling marijuana to the United States under the patronage of Griselda Blanco. After the end of the marijuana boom Escobar began working as an intermediary who bought cocaine paste in Colombia Bolivia and Peru to later resell it to his partners the Ochoa brothers traffickers in charge of taking it to the United States. Medellin Cartel International drug routes Escobar had been involved in organized crime for a decade when the cocaine trade began to spread in Colombia in the mid-1970s. Escobars meteoric rise caught the attention of the Colombian Security Service DAS who arrested him in May 1976 on his return from drug trafficking in Ecuador. DAS agents found 39 kg of cocaine in the spare tire of Escobars car. Escobar managed to change the first judge in the lawsuit and the process expired apparently by bribed the second judge so he was released along with other prisoners. Despite this the case was reopened by Judge Mariela Espinosa who also dropped the investigation due to threats against her life. 50 The following year the agents who arrested Escobar were assassinated. Escobar continued to bribe and intimidate Colombian law enforcement agencies in the same fashion. His carrot-and-stick strategy of bribing public officials and political candidates in Colombia in addition to sending hitmen to murder the ones who rejected his bribes came to be known as silver or lead meaning money or death . 51 42 52 The Medellin Cartel and the Cali Cartel both managed to bribe Colombian politicians and campaigned for both the Conservative and Liberal parties. Although the difference between the two cartels was that the Medellin Cartel used its money or death law through a huge army of hitmen the Cali Cartel preferred to use bribes by having politicians journalists police officers army officers judges etc. on its payroll.. 53 54 Hence Escobar and many other Colombian drug lords were pulling strings in every level of the Colombian government because many of the political candidates whom they backed financially were eventually elected. 53 Although the Medellin Cartel was only established in the early 1970s it expanded after Escobar met several drug lords on a farm in April 1978 and by the end of 1978 they had transported some 19 000 kilograms of cocaine to the United States. 55 The cocaine sent by the Medellin Cartel to the United States was packaged in blocks and entered hidden among parts of machinery cars submarines boats and even in the tires of airplanes coming from Colombia. Up to 15 tons of this drug entered the northern country every day. 56 Rise to prominence Powder cocaine was manufactured packaged and sold by Pablo Escobar and his associates and eventually distributed to the U.S. drug market. Soon the demand for cocaine greatly increased in the United States which led to Escobar organizing more smuggling shipments routes and distribution networks in South Florida California Puerto Rico and other parts of the country. He and cartel co-founder Carlos Lehder worked together to develop a new trans-shipment point in the Bahamas an island called Normans Cay about 350 km 220 mi southeast of the Florida coast. Escobar and Robert Vesco purchased most of the land on the island which included a 1-kilometre 3 300 ft airstrip a harbor a hotel houses boats and aircraft and they built a refrigerated warehouse to store the cocaine. According to his brother Escobar did not purchase Normans Cay; it was instead a sole venture of Lehders. From 1978 to 1982 this was used as a central smuggling route for the Medellin Cartel. With the enormous profits generated by this route Escobar was soon able to purchase 20 square kilometres 7.7 sq mi of land in Antioquia for several million dollars on which he built the Hacienda Napoles . The luxury house he created contained a zoo with more than two hundred species of exotic animals for the region such as hippos giraffes elephants zebras and ostriches all introduced into the country as a result of bribes to the government entity INDERENA and the customs authorities; a lake a sculpture garden; a private bullring; and other amenities for his family and the cartel. Escobar made a show of this by producing a propaganda report about his Hacienda. 57 Escobar was also among the worlds billionaires due to his immense fortune invested in buildings homes automobiles and estates. listed as the seventh richest man in the world according to Forbes something his son would deny years later. 58 59 Escobars political career At the height of his power Escobar was involved in philanthropy in Colombia and paid handsomely for the staff of his cocaine lab. Escobar spent millions developing some of Medellins poorest neighborhoods. He built housing complexes parks football stadiums hospitals schools and churches. 60 61 His most famous charity work was the Medellin without slums neighbourhood aimed at people living in slums at the Medellin municipal dump. 62 63 Shortly before the presidential and regional elections of 1982 began Escobar realized that he had to create a cover to protect his lucrative drug trade. He began to cultivate an image of a respectable man making contacts with politicians financiers lawyers etc. Considered until then a Robin Hood paisa due to his help to the poor of Medellin Escobar would enter politics with the help of Jairo Ortega Ramirez as a congressman representing Antioquia through the Liberal Renewal movement 64 65 although his godfather in politics was the liberal chieftain from Tolima Department Alberto Santofimio Botero . This triumvirate initially supported the candidacy of Luis Carlos Galan a dissident of the Liberal Party for his New Liberalism movement. While campaigning politically in Medellin Galan learned through his assistant Ivan Marulanda that people whose fortunes were of dubious origin had joined Liberal Renovation movement of people whose fortunes were of dubious origin. In Medellins Berrio Park Galan without mentioning Escobars name publicly expelled him rejecting the support of Escobar and others similar to him involved in shady business dealings. 66 67 Despite the opposition and warnings of his partners in 1982 he successfully entered the Colombian Congress. Although only an alternate he was automatically granted parliamentary immunity and the right to a diplomatic passport under Colombian law. At the same time Escobar was gradually becoming a public figure and because of his charitable work he was known as Robin Hood Paisa . He alleged once in an interview that his fortune came from a bicycle rental company he founded when he was 16 years old. 68 After of his election Escobar was invited in 1982 to the inauguration of Felipe Gonzalez the third president of democratic Spain by the Spanish businessman Enrique Sarasola who had important business dealings in Medellin. 69 70 71 72 73 74 The Justice Minister Rodrigo Lara center and presidential candidate Luis Carlos Galan left were both assassinated by orders of Escobar. In Congress in 1983 the new Minister of Justice Rodrigo Lara-Bonilla had become Escobars opponent accusing Escobar of criminal activity from the first day of Congress. Lara who had since denounced the infiltration of illicit money into Colombian politics and soccer teams 75 76 accused him not only of being a drug trafficker but also of being the leader of the paramilitary group Death to Kidnappers MAS created in 1981 to violently stop the onslaught of the M-19 guerrilla movement that had kidnapped Martha Nieves Ochoa sister of his associates. and an attempted kidnapping of his partner Carlos Lehder who managed to escape wounded in the leg. 77 78 Escobar secretly counterattacks alongside Jairo Ortega by showing a copy of a check from drug trafficker Evaristo Porras to Laras Senate campaign 79 80 81 in addition to challenging the minister to show evidence against him under penalty of being sued for slander and defamation. Guillermo Cano editor and owner of the newspaper El Espectador seeing Escobar sensed that he knew him from somewhere so accompanied by Maria Jimena Duzan and another reporter they went to the disorganized archive of the newspaper and found the headline in which it was reported that Escobar together his cousin Gustavo Gaviria had been arrested for possessing coca paste. 82 Tranquilandia was the main cocaine production center of the Medellin Cartel located in the department of Caqueta. It had 19 processing laboratories abundant fresh water from the Yari River an independent electrical system dormitories and a landing strip. The complex was destroyed in 1984 by the National Police and the DEA seizing about 14 tons of drugs valued at 1.2 billion dollars. 83 Escobars arrest in 1976 was investigated by Lara-Bonillas subordinates this confirmed in a Brian Ross s September 5 1983 report on the U.S. television network NBC . 84 A few months later Escobar was publicly expelled from Congress and his visa to the United States was cancelled while Judge Gustavo Zuluaga Serna issued an arrest warrant against Escobar for the murder of the two DAS agents who had captured him in 1976. At the same time and with Laras approval the police headed by Colonel Jaime Ramirez together with the DEA discovered and dismantled Tranquilandia a complex of several cocaine processing laboratories owned by Rodriguez Gacha. Although Escobar fought back he announced his retirement from politics in January 1984. 85 86 Three months later Lara-Bonilla whose honor had previously been called into question and then vindicated was murdered. 87 88 89 War against drugs and narcoterrorism Colombia will hand over criminals requested by the Crime Commission in other countries; so that they are punished in an exemplary manner in this universal operation against an attack that is also universal. President Belisario Betancur 90 President Belisario Betancur who had previously opposed the extradition of Colombians decided to authorize it triggering a series of police operations to capture members of the Medellin Cartel. The main leaders of the Cartel had to take refuge in Panama and tried in May 1984 to talk with former President Alfonso Lopez Michelsen who was acting as an electoral observer in the elections in Panama at the Hilton Hotel in Panama City in a last attempt to approach the goverment denying their authorship of the murder of the minister but offering to surrender on condition of not extraditing them. Their failure was due to the fact that the talks had been leaked to the press. Months later they returned clandestinely to Colombia. 91 92 93 In November 1984 Los Extraditables detonated a car bomb in front of the US embassy in Bogota killing one person. 94 A year after the murder of Lara Bonilla despite the governments announcements to combat them the drug traffickers of the Medellin Cartel now renamed Los Extraditables remained unpunished expanding their criminal apparatus across large areas of the country and opening new cocaine trafficking routes through Nicaragua and Cuba. All of this in collusion with some sectors of the public forces bought off with money and terror. In the fall of 1985 the wanted Escobar requested the Colombian government to allow his conditional surrender without extradition to the United States. The proposal was initially rejected The Los Extraditable Organization was subsequently accused of participating in an effort to prevent the Colombian Supreme Court from studying the constitutionality of Colombias extradition treaty with the United States. 95 96 The Colombian judiciary had been a target of Escobar throughout the mid-1980s. While bribing and murdering several judges; beginning in June 1985 Los Extraditables ordered the death of Judge Tulio Manuel Castro Gil in charge of investigating the Lara Bonilla murder. 97 98 99 100 101 According to reports Escobar who was at war with the guerrillas after the MAS episode approached the M-19 through negotiations with Ivan Marino Ospina . According to some reports it is believed that he was aware of the Palace of Justice siege due to the threats made by Los Extraditables to the magistrates of the courts and because he offered economic support for the operation which was not accepted by the former M-19 militants since the operation according to them had political objectives. 102 The existence of copies of the files and the extradition requests in the foreign ministry American courts and the American embassy disproves that the burning of files was the reason for the guerrilla operation. 103 The operation was authorized by Alvaro Fayad and took place between November 6 and 7 1985 resulting in 94 dead and the disappearance of 11 people during the retaking of the Palace by the Public Force. 104 The Cartels campaign of assassinations against its enemies in the Government and those who supported the extradition treaty made effective in January 1985 with the sending of the first captured to the United States 105 by the newly appointed Minister of Justice Enrique Parejo Gonzalez replacing the murdered Lara and all those who denounced their business and mafia networks. The Extraditables assassinated in February 1986 in Baton Rouge Louisiana the pilot and witness before the American justice system Barry Seal ; 106 107 108 in July the magistrate Hernando Baquero Borda rapporteur of the Extradition Treaty in 1980 109 110 111 and the journalist of El Espectador Roberto Camacho Prada; 112 and on August 18 already with the new president of Colombia Virgilio Barco Vargas the captain of the anti-narcotics police Luis Alfredo Macana. 113 114 In September 1986 Los Extraditables ordered the murder of Diario Occidente journalist Raul Echavarria Barrientos. 115 116 117 118 In September 1986 motorized hitmen killed Judge Zuluaga Serna. 119 120 121 In October 1986 anti-narcotics police colonel Jaime Ramirez Gomez was killed after returning to Bogota from a weekend trip with his family. 122 123 124 On December 17 1986 Guillermo Cano editor of El Espectador newspaper was killed. 125 126 127 128 In January 1987 Escobars hitmen attacked Parejo Gonzalez former Minister of Justice in Budapest and at the time Colombian ambassador to Hungary . 129 130 131 132 133 134 135 In late 1986 Colombias Supreme Court declared the previous extradition treaty illegal due to being signed by a presidential delegation not the president. Escobars victory over the judiciary was short-lived. 136 137 It is believed that Escobar was the one who betrayed Lehder causing his capture on February 4 1987. However unexpectedly Lehder was extradited to the United States.Escobar and the rest of the leadership aware of the danger that extradition represented for their interests and determined to fight it reinforced their military and economic apparatus and set about collecting considerable resources from all drug traffickers even from those who were not part of their group in order to finance the foreseeable escalation of violence. 138 139 140 141 War between drug cartels Although both cartels maintained a cordial relationship the origin of the war between the Medellin and Cali cartels has varied origins. One version suggests disagreement with the violent methods used by Escobar. Added to this the Cali Cartel opposed a war quota against the government by refusing to pay for it. Another version suggests the Cali Cartels zeal to take control of the drug market in Los Angeles and Miami since it currently monopolized drug trafficking in New York City according to a DEA analysis. 142 another version suggests that the Cali Cartel informed on Jorge Luis Ochoa Escobars partner while Ochoa was in Buga Valle del Cauca . This has been denied since Ochoa and Gilberto Rodriguez Orejuela had shared a cell in Spain where they were to be extradited to the United States but both were repatriated to Colombia where they served ridiculous prison sentences. 143 144 145 146 147 According to Jhon Jairo Velasquez Popeye a hitman for the Medellin Cartel the dispute between the two sides began due to disputes between employees of Pablo Escobar and Helmer Herrera: The war began with a love affair between Pina and Jorge Eli El Negro Pabon. El Negro Pabon was a man very loyal to Pablo Emilio Escobar Gaviria and Alejo Pina was a man of Pacho Herrera both had been friends in a New York prison but when El Negro got out of prison he found out that Pina was living with his former wife El Negro spoke with the boss Escobar and they agreed that Pina had to be killed; As the Medellin Cartel killed Hugo Hernan Valencia a man who had had a problem with Gilberto Rodriguez we asked the Rodriguez family to return the favor to let us kill Pina or for them to take care of him themselves with their people. We did not know about the economic and military power of Pacho Herrera. The Rodriguez family instead of explaining this to their boss went directly to tell Pacho Herrera that the Medellin Cartel wanted to kill Pina and thats when war broke out. Jhon Jairo Velasquez Popeye 148 Hugo Hernan Valencia and Pablo Correa Arroyave were the main money launderers for the Cartel. Both had a feud with the heads of the Cali Cartel and the latter had asked Escobar to do them a favor by killing them. But when the Cali Cartel refused to kill Pina Escobar allowed Pabon to kill Pina. In retaliation on January 13 1988 Pacho Herrera ordered his men to place a car bomb at the Monaco tower in the El Poblado sector of Medellin where Escobars family resided. 149 150 The attack left no victims but left the building half destroyed and Manuela Escobar Escobars daughter was left with hearing damage in one of her ears. 151 152 153 In retaliation hitmen from the Medellin Cartel attacked the businesses and properties of the Cali Cartel. On February 18 1988 a branch of La Rebaja Pharmacies 154 155 156 in Medellin followed by nearly 40 dynamite attacks against the drugstores and 10 more against the Colombian Radio Group both belonging to the Rodriguez Orejuela family. 157 158 159 160 1988 marked the beginning of espionage and counterespionage offensives. First Escobar set up an intelligence operation against the Cali Cartel. The Rodriguez Orejuela family in turn hired five retired military officers to form an espionage service against Escobar. Escobar discovered them and kidnapped them. The Cali Cartel then made a peace proposal to which Escobar set two conditions: Compensation of 5 million dollars for the attack on the Monaco building and the surrender of Pacho Herrera Escobars staunch enemy. Gilberto Rodriguez refused to surrender and the five ex-military men were found dead a few days later with a sign that read Members of the Cali Cartel executed for attempting to attack people from Medellin. 161 In December 1988 Escobars hitmen attempt to kidnap Pacho Herrera in Cali the operation fails and Herrera becomes Escobars main target. 162 1989 offensive and failed negotiations See also: Avianca Flight 203 DAS Building bombing and Assasination of Luis Carlos Galan Minister of Justice Enrique Low Murtra signed the extradition orders for Escobar and his cartel aasociates. 163 A few days later the politician and candidate for mayor of Medellin Juan Gomez Martinez 164 165 was saved from an attempted kidnapping claimed by Los Extraditables while Jorge Luis Ochoa was released with impunity under the right of habeas corpus a month later. Andres Pastrana in 1988 candidate for mayor of Bogota kidnapped by orders from Escobar and later president of Colombia 1998-2002. On January 16 1988 Escobars hitmen kidnapped Andres Pastrana candidate for mayor of Bogota and later President of Colombia and held him hidden for several days on a farm near Rionegro. 166 167 168 169 170 171 On January 25 1988 cartel hitmen kidnapped Carlos Mauro Hoyos Attorney General of the Nation as he was heading to the airport in Rionegro Antioquia.Although the plan was to keep both Hoyos and Pastrana captive in the same place the money lavishness of Jorge Restrepo the front man in charge of Pastrana who was held captive barely a week caught the attention of the authorities and the police managed to free Pastrana. But in retaliation alias Popeye shot and killed Carlos Mauro Hoyos 48 who had been kidnapped for 10 hours. 172 173 174 In March 1988 several hundred police officers descended on the El Bizcocho estate owned by Escobar but he was warned at the last minute by the corrupt Lieutenant Colonel Plinio Correa of Police Intelligence B-2 and managed to escape. 175 176 177 178 179 In July 1988 the Secretary General of the Presidency German Montoya had entered into talks with spokesmen for Los Extraditables. Subsequent statements by the government were interpreted by the druglords as an invitation to dialogue so on September 15 they responded with a letter to the Barco administration and sent Montoya a bill for pardons and a demobilization plan. However given the intransigence of the United States reluctant to the possibility of dialogue with the druglords the talks were delayed and in the end they were presented as the personal initiative of the intermediary disassociating the president from them. 180 In March 1989 hitmen from Los Extraditables killed Hector Giraldo Galvez 181 182 the Lara case manager replacing Castro Gil and two months later they blew up the headquarters of the TV production company Mundo Vision. 183 On May 4 1989 the former governor of Boyaca Alvaro Gonzalez Santana father of Judge Martha Lucia Gonzalez was assassinated. 184 185 After the attempted assassination of the head of the DAS General Miguel Maza Marquez on May 30 1989 in Bogota using a powerful explosive charge in a letter bomb that killed 7 people. 186 On July 4 1989 in Medellin in an attack targeting Colonel Valdemar Franklin Quintero the governor of Antioquia Antonio Roldan Betancur died along with five of his companions. 187 188 189 Escobar still held a grudge against Luis Carlos Galan for kicking him out of politics so Galan was assassinated on 18 August 1989 at Escobars orders. Escobar then planted a bomb on Avianca Flight 203 in an attempt to assassinate Galans successor Cesar Gaviria Trujillo who missed the plane and survived. All 107 people were killed in the blast. Because two Americans were also killed in the bombing the U.S. government began to intervene directly. 190 191 La Catedral prison Main article: La Catedral After the assassination of Luis Carlos Galan the administration of Cesar Gaviria moved against Escobar and the drug cartels. Eventually the government negotiated with Escobar and convinced him to surrender and cease all criminal activity in exchange for a reduced sentence and preferential treatment during his captivity. Declaring an end to a series of previous violent acts meant to pressure authorities and public opinion Escobar surrendered to Colombian authorities in 1991. Before he gave himself up the extradition of Colombian citizens to the United States had been prohibited by the newly approved Colombian Constitution of 1991 . This act was controversial as it was suspected that Escobar and other drug lords had influenced members of the Constituent Assembly in passing the law. Escobar was confined in what became his own luxurious private prison La Catedral which featured a football pitch a giant dollhouse a bar a Jacuzzi and a waterfall. Accounts of Escobars continued criminal activities while in prison began to surface in the media which prompted the government to attempt to move him to a more conventional jail on 22 July 1992. Escobars influence allowed him to discover the plan in advance and make a successful escape spending the remainder of his life evading the police. 192 193 Death Main articles: Los Pepes and Search Bloc Members of Search Bloc celebrate over Escobars body on 2 December 1993. His death ended a 16-month search effort. The tomb of Pablo Escobar and family in the Monte Sacro Cemetery Itagui Escobar faced threats from the Colombian police the U.S. government and his rivals the Cali Cartel. On 2 December 1993 Escobar was found in a house in a middle-class residential area of Medellin by Colombian special forces using technology provided by the United States which allowed them to trace Escobars location after he made a call to his family. Police tried to arrest Escobar but the situation quickly escalated to an exchange of gunfire. Escobar was shot and killed while trying to escape from the roof along with a bodyguard who was also shot. He was hit by bullets in the torso and feet and a bullet which struck him in the head killing him. This sparked debate about whether he killed himself or whether he was shot and killed. 42 Aftermath of his death Soon after Escobars death and the subsequent fragmentation of the Medellin Cartel the cocaine market became dominated by the rival Cali Cartel until the mid-1990s when its leaders were either killed or captured by the Colombian government. The Robin Hood image that Escobar had cultivated maintained a lasting influence in Medellin. Many there especially many of the citys poor whom Escobar had aided while he was alive mourned his death and over 25 000 people attended his funeral. Some of them consider him a saint and pray to him for receiving divine help. Escobar was buried at the Monte Sacro Cemetery. 194 Virginia Vallejos testimony See also: Virginia Vallejo Alberto Santofimio Alfonso Lopez Michelsen Ernesto Samper and Alvaro Uribe On 4 July 2006 Virginia Vallejo a television anchorwoman romantically involved with Escobar from 1983 to 1987 offered Attorney General Mario Iguaran her testimony in the trial against former Senator Alberto Santofimio who was accused of conspiracy in the 1989 assassination of presidential candidate Luis Carlos Galan. Iguaran acknowledged that although Vallejo had contacted his office on 4 July the judge had decided to close the trial on 9 July several weeks before the prospective closing date. The action was seen as too late. 195 196 On 18 July 2006 Vallejo was taken to the United States on a special flight of the Drug Enforcement Administration DEA for safety and security reasons due to her cooperation in high-profile criminal cases. 197 198 On 24 July a video in which Vallejo had accused Santofimio of instigating Escobar to eliminate presidential candidate Galan was aired by RCN Television of Colombia. The video was seen by 14 million people and was instrumental for the reopened case of Galans assassination. On 31 August 2011 Santofimio was sentenced to 24 years in prison for his role in the crime. 199 200 Role in the Palace of Justice siege Escobar funded the M-19 communist guerrilla for the assault of the Colombian Palace of Justice. Among Escobars biographers only Vallejo has given a detailed explanation of his role in the 1985 Palace of Justice siege . She stated that Escobar had financed the operation which was committed by M-19 ; she blamed the army for the killings of more than 100 people including 11 Supreme Court magistrates M-19 members and employees of the cafeteria. Her statements prompted the reopening of the case in 2008; Vallejo was asked to testify and many of the events she had described in her book and testimonial were confirmed by Colombias Commission of Truth. 201 202 These events led to further investigation into the siege that resulted with the conviction of a high-ranking former colonel and a former general later sentenced to 30 and 35 years in prison respectively for the forced disappearance of the detained after the siege. 203 204 Vallejo would subsequently testify in Galans assassination. 205 In her book Amando a Pablo odiando a Escobar Loving Pablo Hating Escobar she had accused several politicians including Colombian presidents Alfonso Lopez Michelsen Ernesto Samper and Alvaro Uribe of having links to drug cartels. 206 Relatives Escobars widow Maria Henao now Maria Isabel Santos Caballero son Juan Pablo now Sebastian Marroquin Santos and daughter Manuela fled Colombia in 1995 after failing to find a country that would grant them asylum. 207 Despite Escobars numerous and continual infidelities Maria remained supportive of her husband. Members of the Cali Cartel even replayed their recordings of her conversations with Pablo for their wives to demonstrate how a woman should behave. 208 This attitude proved to be the reason the cartel did not kill her and her children after Pablos death although the group demanded and received millions of dollars in reparations for Escobars war against them. Henao even successfully negotiated for her sons life by personally guaranteeing he would not seek revenge against the cartel or participate in the drug trade. 209 Sebastian Marroquin born as Juan Pablo Escobar is an outspoken critic of the violent deeds of his father. After escaping first to Mozambique then to Brazil the family settled in Argentina . 210 Living under her assumed name Henao became a successful real estate entrepreneur until one of her business associates discovered her true identity and Henao absconded with her earnings. Local media were alerted and after being exposed as Escobars widow Henao was imprisoned for eighteen months while her finances were investigated. Ultimately authorities were unable to link her funds to illegal activity and she was released. 211 According to her son Henao fell in love with Escobar because of his naughty smile and the way he looked at her. He was affectionate and sweet. A great lover. I fell in love with his desire to help people and his compassion for their hardship. We would drive to places where he dreamed of building schools for the poor. From the beginning he was always a gentleman. 212 Maria Victoria Henao de Escobar with her new identity as Maria Isabel Santos Caballero continues to live in Buenos Aires with her son and daughter. 213 On 5 June 2018 the Argentine federal judge Nestor Barral accused her and her son Sebastian Marroquin Santos of money laundering with two Colombian drug traffickers. 214 215 216 The judge ordered the seizing of assets for about 1m each. 217 Argentinian filmmaker Nicolas Entels documentary Sins of My Father 2009 chronicles Marroquins efforts to seek forgiveness on behalf of his father from the sons of Rodrigo Lara Colombias justice minister who was assassinated in 1984 as well as from the sons of Luis Carlos Galan the presidential candidate who was assassinated in 1989. The film was shown at the 2010 Sundance Film Festival and premiered in the U.S. on HBO in October 2010. 218 In 2014 Marroquin published Pablo Escobar My Father under his birth name. The book provides a firsthand insight into details of his fathers life and describes the fundamentally disintegrating effect of his death upon the family. Marroquin aimed to publish the book in hopes to resolve any inaccuracies regarding his fathers excursions during the 1990s. 219 Escobars sister Luz Maria Escobar made multiple gestures in attempts to make amends for the drug barons crimes. These include making public statements in the press leaving letters on the graves of his victims and on the 20th anniversary of his death organizing a public memorial for his victims. 220 Escobars body was exhumed on 28 October 2006 at the request of some of his relatives in order to take a DNA sample to confirm the alleged paternity of an illegitimate child and remove all doubt about the identity of the body that had been buried next to his parents for 12 years. 221 A video of the exhumation was broadcast by RCN angering Marroquin who accused his uncle Roberto Escobar and cousin Nicolas Escobar of being merchants of death by allowing the video to air. 222 Hacienda Napoles After Escobars death the ranch zoo and citadel at Hacienda Napoles were given by the government to low-income families under a law called Extincion de Dominio Domain Extinction. The property has been converted into a theme park surrounded by four luxury hotels overlooking the zoo. 223 Escobar Inc In 2014 Roberto Escobar founded Escobar Inc with Olof K. Gustafsson and registered Successor-In-Interest rights for his brother Pablo Escobar in California United States. 224 Hippos Main article: Pablo Escobars hippos Escobar kept four hippos in a private menagerie at Hacienda Napoles. They were deemed too difficult to seize and move after Escobars death and hence left on the untended estate. By 2007 the animals had multiplied to 16 and had taken to roaming the area for food in the nearby Magdalena River . 225 226 In 2009 two adults and one calf escaped the herd and after attacking humans and killing cattle one of the adults called Pepe was killed by hunters under authorization of the local authorities. 226 As of early 2014 40 hippos have been reported to exist in Puerto Triunfo Antioquia Department from the original four belonging to Escobar. 227 As of 2016 without management the population size is likely to more than double in the next decade. 228 The National Geographic Channel produced a documentary about them titled Cocaine Hippos . 229 A report published in a Yale student magazine noted that local environmentalists are campaigning to protect the animals although there is no clear plan for what will happen to them. 230 In 2018 National Geographic published another article on the hippos which found disagreement among environmentalists on whether they were having a positive or negative impact but that conservationists and locals particularly those in the tourism industry were mostly in support of their continued presence. 231 By October 2021 the Colombian government had started a program of chemically sterilizing the animals. 232 Apartment demolition On 22 February 2019 at 11:53 AM local time Medellin authorities demolished the six-story Edificio Monaco apartment complex in the El Poblado neighborhood where according to retired Colombian general Rosso Jose Serrano Escobar planned some of his most brazen attacks. The building was initially built for Escobars wife but was gutted by a Cali Cartel car bomb in 1988 and had remained unoccupied ever since becoming an attraction to foreign tourists seeking out Escobars physical legacy. Mayor Federico Gutierrez had been pushing to raze the building and erect in its place a park honoring the thousands of cartel victims including four presidential candidates and some 500 police officers. Colombian President Ivan Duque said the demolition means that history is not going to be written in terms of the perpetrators but by recognizing the victims hoping the demolition would showcase that the city had evolved significantly and had more to offer than the legacy left by the cartels. 233 Personal life Family and relationships In March 1976 the 26-year-old Escobar married Maria Victoria Henao Vallejo who was 15. The relationship was discouraged by the Henao Vallejo family who considered Escobar socially inferior; the pair eloped despite being a close friend of Mario Henao Vallejo who would become his brother-in-law. 234 They had two children: Juan Pablo now Sebastian Marroquin and Manuela. In 2007 the journalist Virginia Vallejo published her memoir Amando a Pablo odiando a Escobar Loving Pablo Hating Escobar in which she describes her romantic relationship with Escobar and the links of her lover with several presidents Caribbean dictators and high-profile politicians. 235 Her book inspired the movie Loving Pablo 2017. 236 A drug distributor Griselda Blanco is also reported to have conducted a clandestine but passionate relationship with Escobar; several items in her diary link him with the nicknames Coque de Mi Rey My Coke King and Polla Blanca White Cock. 237 Properties After becoming wealthy Escobar created or bought numerous residences and safe houses with the Hacienda Napoles gaining significant notoriety. The luxury house contained a colonial house a sculpture park and a complete zoo with animals from various continents including elephants exotic birds giraffes and hippopotamuses . Escobar had also planned to construct a Greek-style citadel near it and though construction of the citadel was started it was never finished. 223 Escobar owned a home in the US under his own name: a 6 500 square foot 604 m 2 pink waterfront mansion situated at 5860 North Bay Road in Miami Beach Florida . The four-bedroom estate built in 1948 on Biscayne Bay was seized by the US federal government in the 1980s. Later the dilapidated property was owned by Christian de Berdouare proprietor of the Chicken Kitchen fast-food chain who had bought it in 2014. De Berdouare would later hire a documentary film crew and professional treasure hunters to search the edifice before and after demolition for anything related to Escobar or his cartel. They would find unusual holes in floors and walls as well as a safe that was stolen from its hole in the marble flooring before it could be properly examined. 238 Escobar owned a huge Caribbean getaway on Isla Grande the largest of the cluster of the 27 coral cluster islands comprising Islas del Rosario located about 35 km 22 mi from Cartagena . The compound now half-demolished and overtaken by vegetation and wild animals featured a mansion apartments courtyards a large swimming pool a helicopter landing pad reinforced windows tiled floors and a large but unfinished building to the side of the mansion. 239 In popular culture Books Fernando Botero s portrayal of Escobars death Escobar has been the subject of several books including the following: Escobar 2010 by Roberto Escobar written by his brother shows how he became infamous and ultimately died. 240 Escobar Gaviria Roberto 2016. My Brother Pablo Escobar . Escobar Inc. ISBN 978-0692706374 . Kings of Cocaine 1989 by Guy Gugliotta retells the history and operations of the Medellin Cartel and Escobars role within it. 241 Killing Pablo: The Hunt for the Worlds Greatest Outlaw 2001 by Mark Bowden 242 243 relates how Escobar was killed and his cartel dismantled by U.S. special forces and intelligence the Colombian military and Los Pepes . 244 Pablo Escobar: My Father 2016 by Juan Pablo Escobar translated by Andrea Rosenberg. 245 Pablo Escobar: Beyond Narcos 2016 by Shaun Attwood tells the story of Escobar and the Medellin Cartel in the context of the failed War on Drugs; ISBN 978-1537296302 American Made: Who Killed Barry Seal? Pablo Escobar or George HW Bush 2016 by Shaun Attwood tells Pablos story as a suspect in the murder of CIA pilot Barry Seal; ISBN 978-1537637198 Loving Pablo Hating Escobar 2017 by Virginia Vallejo originally published by Penguin Random House in Spanish in 2007 and later translated to 16 languages. News of a Kidnapping original Spanish title: Noticia de un secuestro non-fiction 1996 book by Gabriel Garcia Marquez and published in English in 1997. Films Two major feature films on Escobar Escobar 2009 and Killing Pablo 2011 were announced in 2007. 246 Details about them and additional films about Escobar are listed below. Blow a 2001 American biographical film based on George Jung a member of the Medellin Cartel; Escobar was portrayed by Cliff Curtis . Pablo Escobar: The King of Coke 2007 is a TV movie documentary by National Geographic featuring archival footage and commentary by stakeholders. 247 248 Escobar 2009 was delayed because of producer Oliver Stone s involvement with the George W. Bush biopic W. 2008. As of 2008 the release date of Escobar remained unconfirmed. when? 249 Regarding the film Stone said: This is a great project about a fascinating man who took on the system. I think I have to thank Scarface and maybe even Ari Gold . 250 Killing Pablo 2011 was supposedly in development for several years directed by Joe Carnahan . It was to be based on Mark Bowden s 2001 book of the same title which in turn was based on his 31-part Philadelphia Inquirer series of articles on the subject. 243 244 The cast was reported to include Christian Bale as Major Steve Jacoby and Venezuelan actor Edgar Ramirez as Escobar. 251 252 In December 2008 Bob Yari producer of Killing Pablo filed for bankruptcy. 253 Escobar: Paradise Lost 2014 a romantic thriller in which a naive Canadian surfer falls in love with a girl who turns out to be Escobars niece. Loving Pablo 2017 Spanish film based on Virginia Vallejo s book Loving Pablo Hating Escobar with Javier Bardem as Escobar and Penelope Cruz as Virginia Vallejo . 254 American Made 2017 American action-comedy film loosely based on the life of Barry Seal ; Escobar was portrayed by Mauricio Mejia. 255 Weird: The Al Yankovic Story 2022 American biopic parody loosely based on the life of Weird Al Yankovic ; Arturo Castro portrays Escobar who is depicted as a Weird Al fan who kidnaps Weird Als girlfriend Madonna to lure him to play at his fortieth birthday party. Weird Al instead murders him. Television In 2005 Court TV now TruTV crime documentary series Mugshots released an episode on Escobar titled Pablo Escobar Hunting The Druglord . 256 In the 2007 HBO television series Entourage actor Vincent Chase played by Adrian Grenier is cast as Escobar in a fictional film entitled Medellin . 257 One of ESPN s 30 for 30 series films The Two Escobars 2010 by directors Jeff and Michael Zimbalist looks back at Colombias World Cup run in 1994 and the relationship between sports and the countrys criminal gangs notably the Medellin narcotics cartel run by Escobar. The other Escobar in the film title refers to former Colombian defender Andres Escobar no relation to Pablo who was shot and killed one month after conceding an own goal that contributed to the elimination of the Colombian national team from the 1994 FIFA World Cup . 258 Caracol TV produced a television series El cartel The Cartel which began airing on 4 June 2008 where Escobar is portrayed by an unknown model when he is shot down by Cartel del Surs hitmen. Also Caracol TV produced a TV Series Pablo Escobar: El Patron del Mal Pablo Escobar The Boss of Evil which began airing on 28 May 2012 and stars Andres Parra as Pablo Escobar. It is based on Alonso Salazars book La parabola de Pablo . 259 Parra reprises his role in TV series Football Dreams A World of Passion and in the first season of El Senor de los Cielos . Parra has declared not to play the character again so as not to typecast himself. RTI Producciones produced a TV Series for RCN Television Tres Caines was released on 4 March 2013 which Escobar is portrayed by the Colombian actor Juan Pablo Franco who portrayed general Muriel Peraza in Pablo Escobar: El Patron del Mal in the first phase of the series. Franco reprises his role in Surviving Escobar: Alias JJ . Also in 2013 Fox Telecolombia produced for RCN Television a TV Series Alias El Mexicano released on 5 November 2013 which Escobar is portrayed by an unknown actor in a minor role. A Netflix original television series depicting the story of Escobar titled Narcos was released on 28 August 2015 starring Brazilian actor Wagner Moura as Pablo. 260 Season two premiered on the streaming service on 2 September 2016. 261 In 2016 Teleset and Sony Pictures Television produced for RCN Television the TV Series En la boca del lobo was released on 16 August 2016 which Escobar is portrayed by Fabio Restrepo who portrayed Javier Ortiz in Pablo Escobar: El Patron del Mal as the character of Flavio Escolar. National Geographic in 2016 broadcast a biography series Facing that included an episode featuring Escobar. 262 On 24 January 2018 Netflix released the 68-minute-long documentary Countdown to Death: Pablo Escobar directed by Santiago Diaz and Pablo Martin Farina. 263 264 Killing Escobar was a documentary televised in the UK in 2021. It concerned a failed attempt by mercenaries contracted by the Cali Cartel and led by Peter McAleese to assassinate Escobar in 1989. Fox Telecolombia produced in 2019 a TV Series El General Naranjo which aired on 24 May 2019 which Escobar is portrayed by the Colombian actor Federico Rivera. Music The 2013 song Pablo by American rapper E-40 serves as an ode to the legacy of Pablo Escobar. 265 The 2016 album The Life of Pablo by American rapper Kanye West was named after the three Pablos who inspired and represented some part of the album with one of them being Pablo Escobar. 266 Dubdogzs Pablo Escobar feat. Charlott Boss released in 2020 has garnered more than 5.6 million views for its official music video. 267 The 2018 hit single Narcos by the Atlanta-based rap group Migos from their album Culture II makes references to Pablo Escobar as well as the Medellin Cartel and the Netflix series Narcos. 268 References Discrecion un secuestro y una millonaria herencia: La historia del misterioso padre de Pablo Escobar . 23 September 2018. La herencia desconocida del papa de Pablo Escobar . 5 November 2016. Mama de Pablo Escobar y su extrana peticion para el entierro del narcotraficante . 29 June 2023. No me averguenza ser la mama de Pablo Escobar : La madre del jefe del Cartel de Medellin dedico sus ultimos dias a limpiar la imagen de su hijo . 22 April 2023. La Oficina la banda de sicarios que creo Pablo Escobar y que el Gobierno colombiano aun no logra doblegar . 2 June 2019. Pablo Escobar en EL PAIS . September 2024. a b Macias Amanda 21 September 2015. 10 facts reveal the absurdity of Pablo Escobars wealth . businessinsider.com . Insider Inc. Archived from the original on 18 October 2023 . Retrieved 28 July 2018 . Heres How Rich Pablo Escobar Would Be If He Was Alive Today . UNILAD . 13 September 2016. Archived from the original on 29 July 2018 . Retrieved 28 July 2018 . Billonarios! . 2 November 1987. Escobar Juan Pablo 2014. Pablo Escobar My Father . New York: St. Martins Press. p. 469. Internacional - Noticias de El Salvador - Noticias de El Salvador . Archived from the original on 7 May 2016. Forbes History: The Original 1987 List of International Billionaires . Forbes . Los Otros Duenos del Pais . 26 August 1996. Pablo Escobar Gaviria English Biography Articles and Notes . ColombiaLink.com. Archived from the original on 8 November 2006 . Retrieved 16 March 2011 . http:blogs.elpais.comversion-muy-original201005fC3BAtbol-droga-y-muerte-en-colombia.htmlmore Se confiesa Popeye mano derecha de Pablo Escobar 20050814 . Archived from the original on 29 November 2014. Una estratagema derroto al criminal mas buscado del mundo . Es el Chapo Guzman el Pablo Escobar del siglo XXI? . 23 February 2014. Recuerdan asesinato de El Patron Escobar - . 3 December 2018. Cuando Escobar les puso precio a las vidas de los policias . December 2018. Las cifras del mal . 23 November 2013. Sabogal Hugo 29 August 1988. Lucha a muerte de los carteles colombianos de Cali y Medellin por el control del narcotrafico en Nueva York . El Pais . Cronologia de la Guerra . 29 October 1990. Familiares exhumaron cadaver de Pablo Escobar para verificar plenamente su identidad . El Tiempo . permanent dead link Decline of the Medellin Cartel and the Rise of the Cali Mafia . U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration. Archived from the original on 18 January 2006 . Retrieved 13 February 2010 . Pablo Escobar: Biography . Biography.com. Archived from the original on 30 June 2023 . Retrieved 17 July 2019 . Escobars Former Mansion Will Now Be A Theme Park . Medellin Living. 13 January 2014. Archived from the original on 18 October 2023 . Retrieved 17 July 2019 . cuatro.com 19 April 2018. Roberto hermano de Pablo Escobar: Mi familia tiene raices espanolas del Pais Vasco . Cuatro in Spanish . Retrieved 28 August 2024 . Se Entrego Hermano de Pablo Escobar . 22 June 1991. Family tree of Ivan Restrepo-Jaramillo Ivanrepo . Archived from the original on 3 June 2014. La Familia Escobar Gaviria Regreso a Medellin . 9 July 1993. https:www.caracoltv.comalba-marina-escobar-la-consentida-del-capo-mC3A1s-1332-historia Que dicen las cartas que dejaron en la tumba de Pablo Escobar en el aniversario 25 de su muerte . 4 December 2018. Luis Fernando Escobar Gaviria . May 2022. Roberto Gaviria Cobaleda . 29 April 2022. El cuadro de Dali el escondite para sus amantes y otras anecdotas increibles de Pablo Escobar a 25 anos de su muerte . 2 December 2018. Jose Obdulio Gaviria cumpliendo el sueno de su primo Pablo Escobar . 11 July 2016. https:www.guioteca.comlos-9020-de-las-frases-mas-recordadas-del-narcotraficante-pablo-escobar-quien-a-veces-decia-ser-dios http:www.presidencia.gov.coprensanewsne2004agosto0518052004.htm Pablo Escobar: The Rise and Fall of the King of Cocaine . Archived from the original on 15 February 2024 . Retrieved 15 February 2024 . Deas Malcolm 4 December 1993. Obituary: Pablo Escobar . Independent . Archived from the original on 18 August 2016 . Retrieved 29 July 2016 . a b c Minster Christopher 8 July 2016. Biography of Pablo Escobar . About.com . About Inc. Archived from the original on 14 January 2016 . Retrieved 29 July 2016 . Chepesiuk Ron 2013. Escobar Versus Cali: The War of the Cartels . Strategic Media Books. ISBN 9781939521019 . Escobar Roberto 2012. Escobar . Hodder Stoughton. ISBN 978-1848942912 . Archived from the original on 18 October 2023 . Retrieved 19 May 2023 . Bowden Mark 2001. Killing Pablo . London: Atlantic Books. pp. 3337. ISBN 978-1-84354-651-1 . Retrieved 19 June 2023 . http:www.elmundo.comportalopinioncolumnistaslomaloylobueno.php Datos del temeroso narcotraficante Pablo Escobar . 2 December 2013. 15 datos que quizas no conocias de Pablo Escobar . 2 December 2016. Los Jinetes de la Cocaina . http:www.elespectador.comnoticiasarticulo-372559-arremetida-contra-justicia Torres Ruben Ortiz 9 February 2020. Plata O Plomo O Glitter . royaleprojects.com . Archived from the original on 18 October 2023 . Retrieved 19 June 2023 . Bowden 2001 pp. 4042. a b Rubio Mauricio. Colombia: Coexistence Legal Confrontation and War with Illegal Armed Groups PDF . Archived PDF from the original on 15 November 2021. Collett Merrill 14 November 1987. COLOMBIAS DRUG LORDS WAGING WAR ON LEFTISTS . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 15 March 2023 . Retrieved 13 August 2023 . Chepsiuk Ron 1999. The War on Drugs: An International Encyclopedia . Santa Barbara California: ABC-Clio. p. 133. ISBN 978-0-87436-985-4 . Archived from the original on 7 June 2022 . Retrieved 7 June 2022 . http:www.businessinsider.com10-facts-that-prove-the-absurdity-of-pablo-escobars-wealth-2015-9 The godfather of cocaine . Frontline . WGBH. Archived from the original on 2 April 2016 . Retrieved 7 September 2017 . Pablo Escobars Son: Forbes is Lying . Forbes . Hector Latorre 2 December 2003. Colombia: 10 anos sin Escobar . Pablo Escobar: Interesting Facts You May Not Know About the King of Cocaine . LATIN POST . 25 October 2020. Archived from the original on 18 October 2023 . Retrieved 13 August 2023 . Herzog Rudolph 9 July 2015. Pablo Escobar Biopic: The Cocaine King Full of Contradictions . Newsweek . Archived from the original on 13 August 2023 . Retrieved 13 August 2023 . Medellin sin tugurios: SEMANA visito el barrio que levanto Pablo Escobar. Alli todavia lamentan la muerte del capo . 2 December 2023. El barrio Medellin sin tugurios la herencia de Pablo Escobar que sus habitantes quieren cambiar . 3 February 2021. Jairo Ortega el politico paisa que llevo a Pablo Escobar al Congreso . 16 August 2018. Carino preparate para ser la primera dama : Asi fue el camino de Pablo Escobar en la politica . 28 September 2023. Lo que nunca le perdono Pablo Escobar a Luis Carlos Galan . 18 August 2024. Asesinato de Luis Carlos Galan . Bowden 2001 pp. 4857. El dia que Felipe Gonzalez conocio al narco Pablo Escobar . 28 October 2022. Cuando Pablo Escobar se colo en la fiesta de Gonzalez: La noche electoral oculta del 82 . 28 October 2022. La carrera politica de Pablo Escobar: Asi fue como el mas sanguinario narcotraficante colombiano trato de ser presidente . 26 September 2021. Cuando Pablo Escobar me presento en Madrid a Felipe Gonzalez el dia que gano las elecciones . Felipe Gonzalez y el dinero de los carteles colombianos de la droga . 13 March 2021. Iglesias recuerda que Felipe Gonzalez conocio al narco Pablo Escobar en Madrid . 21 November 2016. Se Prendio la Mecha . 19 September 1983. Rodrigo Lara: 10 Anos . May 1994. Muerte a secuestradores MAS: Los origenes del paramilitarismo . 23 September 2011. El MAS mito fundacional del paramilitarismo . https:revistas.javerianacali.edu.coindex.phpperspectivasinternacionalesarticledownload122410651528 Los ataques contra Rodrigo Lara Bonilla por enfrentar a Pablo Escobar . 2 December 2018. Cual es el origen del enfrentamiento entre Artunduaga y los Lara? . 24 February 2016. https:www.elespectador.comjudicialeste-es-el-articulo-de-el-espectador-que-revelo-que-pablo-escobar-era-un-narco Thirty Years of Americas Drug War Drug Wars FRONTLINE PBS . PBS . Ehrenfeld Rachel 1994. Evil Money: the Inside Story of Money Laundering and Corruption in Government Banks and Business . New York NY: Shapolsky Publishers Inc. p. 14. ISBN 1-56171-333-3 . Archived from the original on 20 May 2024 . Retrieved 13 April 2015 . La sangrienta venganza de Pablo Escobar contra todos los que ayudaron a desenmascararlo . 3 December 2023. Asi fue desmantelado Tranquilandia el primer gran laboratorio de droga de Pablo Escobar . 5 October 2023. Bowden 2001 pp. 6367. Una historia sin contar de Rodrigo Lara Bonilla . March 2016. https:www.elespectador.comopinioncolumnistasramiro-bejarano-guzmanel-hombre-que-dejamos-solo El presidente Betancur declara la guerra a los traficantes de drogas en Colombia tras el asesinato del ministro de Justicia . El Pais . 2 May 1984. https:www.elespectador.comopinioncolumnistasoscar-alarconlos-narcos-en-panama La relacion de Pablo Escobar y Manuel Antonio Noriega: Desde Panama negocio un tratado de paz vio nacer a su hija y tuvo cedula . 10 October 2023. Escobar: 17 Anos de Historia del Criminal . 2 December 1993. Carro-Bomba en la Embajada . 31 December 1984. Exaliado de Escobar narra presuntos tratos con Cuba y los sandinistas . Un exaliado de Pablo Escobar narra supuestos negocios con Cuba y los sandinistas . 15 January 2024. https:www.elespectador.comjudicialcaso-rodrigo-lara-la-viuda-del-juez-que-sono-con-una-familia-de-profesionales https:www.eltiempo.comarchivodocumentoMAM-198150 https:www.semana.comespeciales-editorialesarticulouna-persona-para-el-pais-que-necesitamos202046 https:www.rcnradio.comcolombiafamilia-reclama-que-crimen-de-juez-que-investigo-pablo-escobar-sea-de-lesa https:www.noticiascaracol.comcolombiala-sangrienta-venganza-de-pablo-escobar-contra-todos-los-que-ayudaron-a-desenmascararlo-rg10 https:www.elespectador.comcolombia2020justiciaverdadpablo-escobar-no-ordeno-la-toma-del-palacio-dicen-exmiembros-del-m-19 https:pares.com.co20201104palacio-de-justicia-35-anos-de-ignominia https:www.bbc.commundonoticias201511151030colombia30aniversariotomapalaciodejusticianc Espectador El 2 August 2012. ELESPECTADOR.COM . ELESPECTADOR.COM . https:www.infobae.comcolombia20231017barry-seal-el-piloto-norteamericano-que-revelo-los-negocios-de-pablo-escobar-en-nicaragua https:www.lanacion.com.arel-mundobarry-seal-el-piloto-que-trabajo-para-la-cia-fue-narcotraficante-e-informante-de-la-dea-y-murio-nid11042022 https:www.infobae.comamericacolombia20190216barry-seal-el-piloto-traficante-que-creyo-ser-mas-inteligente-que-el-cartel-de-medellin https:www.eltiempo.comarchivodocumentoMAM-359222 https:www.elespectador.comjudicialhernando-baquero-un-magistrado-en-el-olvido-article-646903 https:www.semana.comeconomiaarticulocruel-despedida8038-3 https:www.elespectador.comopinioncolumnistasroberto-j-camachoel-homicidio-de-roberto-camacho-column-214007 https:www.semana.comenfant-terrible8094-3 https:www.eltiempo.comarchivodocumentoMAM-60242 https:flip.org.copronunciamientosraul-echavarria-barrientos-el-periodista-que-lucho-contra-el-narcotrafico http:www.elnuevosiglo.com.coarticulos10-2018-visionarios http:www.eltiempo.comarchivodocumentoMAM-566770 http:www.eltiempo.comarchivodocumentoMAM-270722 https:www.noticiascaracol.comcolombiala-sangrienta-venganza-de-pablo-escobar-contra-todos-los-que-ayudaron-a-desenmascararlo-rg10 https:www.elcolombiano.commedellin-es-mas-que-pablo-escobarasesinato-juez-gustavo-zuluaga https:www.elespectador.comespecialesasesinado-magistrado-de-medellin-348079 https:www.semana.comnacionarticuloquien-mato-al-coronel-ramirez8791-3 https:www.noticiascaracol.comantioquiaasi-recuerda-su-familia-al-coronel-jaime-ramirez-quien-combatio-como-ninguno-al-narcotrafico https:www.elespectador.cominvestigacionel-heroe-de-la-policia-antinarcoticos-article-362373 https:www.infobae.comcolombia20240209el-estado-le-pedira-perdon-a-guillermo-cano-por-su-asesinato-en-1986 https:www.elespectador.comjudicialcronologia-de-un-crimen-sin-respuesta-todo-sobre-el-asesinato-de-guillermo-cano https:elpais.comamerica-colombia2024-02-09el-estado-pide-perdon-a-la-familia-de-guillermo-cano-por-no-haber-garantizado-su-vida.html https:www.elespectador.cominvestigaciondon-guillermo-cano-murio-en-mis-brazos-article-363360 https:www.eltiempo.comjusticiainvestigacionatentado-contra-exministro-enrique-parejo-es-delito-de-lesa-humanidad-345840 https:www.noticiasrcn.comcolombiadeclaran-delito-de-lesa-humanidad-el-atentado-contra-el-exministro-enrique-parejo-338396 https:www.radionacional.coculturadeclaran-como-crimen-de-lesa-humanidad-atentado-exministro-enrique-parejo https:www.facebook.comLosInformantesTVvideos2021-august-parejo-a-pruebas-de-balas207221634701914 https:elpais.comdiario19870114internacional537577225850215.html https:www.rcnradio.comjudicialdeclaran-como-delito-de-lesa-humanidad-atentado-contra-el-exministro-enrique-parejo https:www.lafm.com.cojudicialatentado-contra-enrique-parejo-es-ahora-un-delito-de-lesa-humanidad Cali Colombia Nacional Pablo Escobar financio la toma del Palacio de Justicia Escobar financio toma del Palacio de Justicia . El Pais . Archived from the original on 24 October 2015 . Retrieved 12 September 2015 . Bowden 2001 pp. 8285. https:www.infobae.comcolombia20240115en-el-libro-del-exnarcotraficante-carlos-lehder-cuales-relatos-son-verdad-o-mentira https:www.elpais.com.cocolombiatraicion-y-condena-carlos-lehder-revelo-como-fue-que-termino-en-una-carcel-en-ee-uu-por-culpa-de-pablo-escobar-1433.html https:www.infobae.comcolombia20240116carlos-lehder-se-refirio-al-odio-de-pablo-escobar-por-rodrigo-lara-era-alergico-a-que-se-pronunciara-su-nombre https:www.rcnradio.comcolombiacarlos-lehder-hablo-de-la-traicion-de-pablo-escobar-que-lo-llevo-a-la-carcel-el-cain http:content.time.comtimecovers0 16641 19910701 00.html https:www.elespectador.comjudicialcapturados-en-espana-y-absueltos-en-colombia-article-360997 https:www.eltiempo.comarchivodocumentoMAM-10269 https:www.semana.comcero-van-dos9694-3 https:www.eltiempo.comarchivodocumentoMAM-50624 https:elpais.comdiario19841123madrid470060654850215.html https:web.archive.orgweb20161011083817http:app.eltiempo.combocadpopeye-uno-de-los-asesinos-cercanos-a-pablo-escobar-en-entrevista-con-revista-bocas14425556 https:www.semana.comnacionarticuloel-que-falta26470-3 https:www.semana.comquien-fue9886-3 https:www.semana.comvuelve-juega14050-3 https:www.eltiempo.comcolombiamedellinrecorrido-por-el-edificio-monaco-de-pablo-escobar-en-medellin-249268 https:www.eltiempo.comculturagentepablo-escobar-la-historia-de-la-bomba-en-el-edificio-monaco-que-desato-una-guerra-831619 https:www.infobae.comcolombia20230612drogas-la-rebaja-la-cadena-de-farmacias-con-la-que-se-lavaba-dinero-del-narcotrafico-y-que-ahora-es-parte-del-estado-en-colombia https:www.semana.comsaludarticulola-guerra-entre-carteles-y-la-oscura-historia-de-drogas-la-rebaja-cadena-de-farmacias-que-apoyara-reforma-a-la-salud202352 https:www.las2orillas.codrogas-la-rebaja-fue-la-idea-de-los-narcos-mas-asesinos-de-colombia https:www.eltiempo.comarchivodocumentoMAM-339211 https:elpais.comdiario19880829internacional588808815850215.html https:www.eltiempo.comarchivodocumentoMAM-64400 https:www.elpais.com.cojudicialen-cali-aun-hay-cicatrices-de-la-guerra-entre-carteles-del-narcotrafico.html https:www.infobae.comamericacolombia20220601el-capo-que-pablo-escobar-no-pudo-matar-la-guerra-de-gilberto-y-miguel-rodriguez-orejuela-contra-el-lider-del-cartel-de-medellin https:www.semana.comespecialesarticulocronologia-de-la-guerra14051-3 https:www.portafolio.coopinionbeethoven-herrera-valenciaenrique-low-murtra-y-la-ingratitud-del-estado-553416 https:www.eltiempo.comarchivodocumentoMAM-3458 https:elpais.comdiario19900118ultima632617202850215.html https:web.comisiondelaverdad.coactualidadnoticiasandres-pastrana-quinto-expresidente-que-hablara-con-la-comision-de-la-verdad https:www.elespectador.compolitica1988-hace-20-anos-secuestraron-a-pastrana-article-25804 https:www.semana.comel-reto-de-la-mafia9895-3 https:elpais.comdiario19880120internacional569631605850215.html https:www.elespectador.compolitica1988-hace-20-anos-secuestraron-a-pastrana-article-25804 https:www.diariolasamericas.comamerica-latinaandres-pastrana-el-periodista-secuestrado-que-llego-la-presidencia-n5345696 https:www.eltiempo.comarchivodocumentoMAM-283253 https:www.noticiascaracol.comcolombiaotro-vil-crimen-de-pablo-escobar-carlos-mauro-hoyos-el-procurador-que-se-convirtio-en-martir-rg10 https:www.elcolombiano.comblogscasillerodeletrasasesinado-el-procurador-general-de-la-nacion10388 https:www.eltiempo.comarchivodocumentoMAM-50619 https:www.semana.comel-gran-escape10127-3 https:www.eltiempo.comarchivodocumentoMAM-241689 https:www.escenariosdeguerra.compablo-escobar-ruta-medellin https:www.escenariosdeguerra.compablo-escobar-ruta-medellin https:www.elespectador.comespecialeslos-intentos-politicos-de-escobar-por-negociar-su-guerra-379288 https:flip.org.copronunciamientoshector-giraldo-un-investigador-incansable https:www.elespectador.comcolombiamas-regionesel-legado-de-hector-giraldo-article-483641 https:www.eltiempo.comarchivodocumentoMAM-107320 https:www.coljuristas.orgsaladeprensacarta-de-martha-lucia-gonzalez-a-su-padre-alvaro-gonzalez-asesinado-en-mayo-de-1989 https:www.elespectador.comcolombia-20paz-y-memoriaalvaro-gonzalez-santana-la-memoria-de-un-abogado-inerme-article https:www.las2orillas.co30-mayo-1989-primer-carro-bomba-maza-la-extrana-cadena-implicaciones https:www.eltiempo.comarchivodocumentoMAM-358688 https:www.eltiempo.comarchivodocumentoMAM-158487 https:caracol.com.coemisora20190704medellin1562239392014280.html Bowden 2001 pp. 9394. 25 years on Colombia still mourns Escobar plane bombing still wants answers . The Japan Times . 8 July 2016. Archived from the original on 24 June 2016 . Retrieved 30 July 2016 . Treaster Joseph B. 23 July 1992. Colombian Drug Baron Escapes Luxurious Prison After Gunfight . The New York Times . p. 1. Archived from the original on 2 May 2013 . Retrieved 21 July 2011 . Ross Timothy 24 July 1992. Escobar escape humiliates Colombian leaders . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 3 April 2019 . Retrieved 7 February 2017 via www.theguardian.com. Wallace Arturo 2 December 2013. Drug boss Pablo Escobar still divides Colombia . BBC News . Archived from the original on 14 August 2017 . Retrieved 21 June 2018 . Colombian Attorney General on Virginia Vallejos offer to testify against Santofimio PDF . Archived from the original PDF on 1 March 2011. Back to jail for Colombia ex-minister . Independent Online . Bogota. 1 September 2011. Archived from the original on 3 April 2019 . Retrieved 19 October 2017 . Virginia Vallejo takes refuge in United States . Virginia Vallejo. Archived from the original on 17 July 2011. reprinted and translated from Gonzalo Guillen 16 July 2006. Virginia Vallejo . El Nuevo Herald . Pablo Escobars Ex-Lover Flees Colombia . Fox News Channel. Archived from the original on 17 January 2018 . Retrieved 1 April 2009 . Testimony of Virginia Vallejo in 2006 . Archived from the original on 11 September 2015 . Retrieved 21 September 2018 . Radio Nizkor: Colombia . www.radionizkor.org . Archived from the original on 22 December 2018 . Retrieved 21 September 2018 . Virginia Vallejo testifico en el caso Palacio de Justicia . Caracol Radio. 27 August 2008. Archived from the original on 14 February 2012 . Retrieved 3 May 2011 . Michael Evans 17 December 2009. Truth Commission Blames Colombian State for Palace of Justice Tragedy . UNREDACTED. Archived from the original on 5 May 2011 . Retrieved 3 May 2011 . Colombia ex-officer jailed after historic conviction . BBC News. 10 June 2010. Archived from the original on 11 April 2019 . Retrieved 21 June 2018 . Colombian 1985 Supreme Court raid commander sentenced . BBC News . 29 April 2011. Archived from the original on 10 April 2019 . Retrieved 21 June 2018 . Galan Slaying a State Crime Colombian Prosecutors Say . Latin American Herald Tribune . Archived from the original on 9 August 2018 . Retrieved 17 November 2009 . Romero Simon 3 October 2007. Colombian Leader Disputes Claim of Tie to Cocaine Kingpin . The New York Times . p. 1. Archived from the original on 9 August 2018 . Retrieved 18 February 2017 . Drug lords wife and son arrested . BBC News . 17 November 1999. Archived from the original on 3 April 2019 . Retrieved 13 February 2010 . Escobar 2014 p. 466. Escobar 2014 pp. 468495. King Julie 15 June 2015. A Cursed Family: A Look at Pablo Escobars Family 21 Years After His Death . XPat Nation . Archived from the original on 20 January 2016. Escobar 2014 pp. 521537. Escobar 2014 p. 68. Se conoce foto de la hija de Pablo Escobar en Buenos Aires . El Tiempo . 25 April 2018. Archived from the original on 21 September 2018 . Retrieved 19 September 2018 . Pablo Escobars widow and son in Argentina money laundering probe . Deutsche Welle . 1 November 2017. Archived from the original on 21 September 2018 . Retrieved 19 September 2018 . Pablo Escobars widow and son held on money laundering charges in Argentina . 5 June 2018. Archived from the original on 26 May 2019 . Retrieved 21 September 2018 via YouTube. Lam Katherine 6 June 2018. Pablo Escobars widow son charged with money laundering in Argentina . Fox News . Archived from the original on 21 September 2018 . Retrieved 20 September 2018 . Pablo Escobars widow and son held on money laundering charges in Argentina . The Guardian . 5 June 2018. Archived from the original on 21 September 2018 . Retrieved 19 September 2018 . Drug lords son seeks forgiveness . CNN. 12 December 2009. Archived from the original on 6 April 2010 . Retrieved 13 February 2010 . Shepherd Jack 12 September 2016. Narcos season 2: Pablo Escobars son labels Netflix show insulting lists 28 historical errors . Independent . Archived from the original on 24 May 2022. Alexander Harriet 3 December 2014. Pablo Escobars sister trying to pay for the sins of her brother Luz Maria Escobar the sister of Colombian cartel boss Pablo Escobar has told how she is trying to make amends for her murderous brother . The Telegraph . Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Familiares exhumaron cadaver de Pablo Escobar para verificar plenamente su identidad . El Tiempo in Spanish. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 10 January 2016 . La exhumacion de Pablo . Semana in Spanish. Archived from the original on 23 January 2016 . Retrieved 10 January 2016 . a b Ceaser Mike 2 June 2008. At home on Pablo Escobars ranch . BBC News . Archived from the original on 7 November 2017 . Retrieved 13 February 2010 . California Business Portal: Successor-In-Interest . 28 April 2015. Archived from the original on 21 February 2015 . Retrieved 9 June 2016 . Kraul Chris 20 December 2006. A hippo critical situation . Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on 24 March 2015 . Retrieved 27 March 2008 . a b Colombia kills drug baron hippo . BBC News . 11 July 2009. Archived from the original on 5 January 2015 . Retrieved 11 July 2009 . Hipopotamos bravos . El Espectador . 24 June 2014. Archived from the original on 9 May 2014 . Retrieved 28 June 2014 . English translation Archived 21 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine at Google Translate Howard B.C. 10 May 2016. Pablo Escobars Escaped Hippos Are Thriving in Colombia . National Geographic . Archived from the original on 27 February 2018 . Retrieved 26 February 2018 . The Invaders: Cocaine Hippos . National Geographic Channel . Archived from the original on 26 June 2013. Nagvekar Rahul 8 March 2017. Zoo Gone Wild: After Escobar Colombia Faces His Hippos . The Politic . Archived from the original on 13 September 2017 . Retrieved 25 August 2017 . Wilcox Christie 26 September 2018. Could Pablo Escobars Escaped Hippos Help the Environment? . National Geographic . Archived from the original on 11 October 2018 . Retrieved 18 October 2018 . Pablo Escobar: Colombia sterilises drug lords hippos . BBC News . 16 October 2021. Archived from the original on 18 October 2023 . Retrieved 16 October 2021 . Pablo Escobars six-floor apartment demolished in Medellin as symbol of rebirth . Fox News . 22 February 2019. Archived from the original on 1 March 2019 . Retrieved 24 February 2019 . Escobar 2014 p. 74. Los Narcopresidentes The Narco-presidents. YouTube in Spanish. 24 November 2008. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021 . Retrieved 15 October 2017 . Mayorga Emilio 3 September 2017. Loving Pablo Director on Reuniting Javier Bardem and Penelope Cruz: Its Been Very Intense . Variety . Archived from the original on 3 April 2019 . Retrieved 18 October 2017 . Jerry Tom 30 September 2013. Me Matan Limon! -Patricio Rey y sus Redonditos de Ricota . INEDITO . Archived from the original on 28 October 2021 . Retrieved 19 June 2016 via YouTube. Macias Amanda 24 January 2016. Military Defense: A luxurious Miami mansion built by the King of Cocaine is no more . Business Insider . Associated Press. Archived from the original on 24 April 2019 . Retrieved 10 September 2016 . Macias Amanda 12 May 2016. Military Defense: This dilapidated villa once served as a Caribbean getaway for drug-kingpin Pablo Escobar . Business Insider . Archived from the original on 19 September 2018 . Retrieved 10 September 2016 . Escobar Roberto 2010. Escobar . Hodder Paperbacks. McAleese Peter 1993. No Mean Soldier . Cassell Pub. Bowden Mark 2002. Killing Pablo: The Hunt for the Worlds Greatest Outlaw . Penguin Pub. a b McNary Dave 1 October 2007. Yari fast-tracking Escobar biopic . Variety . Retrieved 29 November 2007 . a b What is actor Christian Bale doing next? . Journal Now. 25 December 2008. Archived from the original on 5 June 2009 . Retrieved 17 January 2009 . Escobar Juan Pablo 2016. Pablo Escobar: My Father . Thomas Dunne Books. ISBN 9781250104625 . Weekly Screengrab: Sparring Partners . TribecaFilmFestival.org. 1 October 2007. permanent dead link Pablo Escobar: The King of Coke . National Geographic. 2007. Archived from the original on 21 December 2019 . Retrieved 10 September 2016 . Amazon Pablo Escobar: The King of Coke . National Geographic. 2007. Archived from the original on 3 April 2019 . Retrieved 10 September 2016 . La Peliculas No Bardem for Killing Pablo . WhatCulture . Archived from the original on 21 November 2008 . Retrieved 27 July 2013 . Fleming Michael 8 October 2007. Stone to produce another Escobar . Variety . Retrieved 28 November 2007 . Venezuelan actor Edgar Ramirez to Play PABLO ESCOBAR . Poor But Happy . Archived from the original on 4 May 2009. Faraci Devin 14 August 2008. Joe Carnahan Is Going to Be Killing a New Pablo and We Know Who It Is . Chud. Archived from the original on 15 August 2008. Fleming Michael 12 December 2008. Bob Yari crashes into Chapter 11 . Variety . Vivarelli Nick 11 September 2017. Javier Bardem on Playing Pablo Escobar With Penelope Cruz in Loving Pablo . Variety . Archived from the original on 17 April 2019 . Retrieved 11 October 2017 . American Made: Film Review . The Hollywood Reporter . 29 September 2017. Archived from the original on 3 April 2019 . Retrieved 24 November 2017 . Mugshots Pablo Escobar Hunting the Druglord . snagfilms.com . 2005. Archived from the original on 24 October 2017 . Retrieved 24 October 2017 . This episode follows Escobar on his journey to becoming the Columbian Godfather. Barius Claudette 18 June 2007. Entourage : The making of Medellin . Entertainment Weekly . Archived from the original on 17 November 2016 . Retrieved 4 September 2016 . The Two Escobars . the2escobars.com. Archived from the original on 4 December 2015 . Retrieved 1 October 2010 . Telemundo Medias Pablo Escobar El Patron del Mal Averages Nearly 2.2 Million Total Viewersby zap2it.com . TV by the Numbers . Zap2It. 10 July 2012. Archived from the original on 19 July 2012 . Retrieved 4 September 2016 . Shepherd Jack 28 July 2015. New on Netflix August 2015: From Narcos and Spellbound to Kick Ass 2 and Dinotrux . The Independent . Archived from the original on 24 May 2022 . Retrieved 4 September 2016 . Strause Jackie 2 September 2016. Narcos Season 2: Episode-by-Episode Binge-Watching Guide . The Hollywood Reporter . Archived from the original on 18 October 2023 . Retrieved 4 September 2016 . Sang Lucia I. Suarez 30 August 2016. Ex-DEA agents who fought Pablo Escobar headline new NatGeo documentary . Fox News. Archived from the original on 18 October 2023 . Retrieved 13 October 2017 . Countdown to Death: Pablo Escobar . Netflix . permanent dead link Is Countdown to Death: Pablo Escobar 2017 on Netflix USA? . Whats New on Netflix USA . Archived from the original on 18 October 2023 . Retrieved 30 November 2018 . E-40 The Block Brochure Parts 4 5 6 Album Covers Track Lists . hiphop-n-more.com . 29 October 2013. Archived from the original on 18 October 2023 . Retrieved 10 June 2021 . Trzcinski Matthew 5 May 2020. Kanye West Once Explained the Identity of Pablo From The Life of Pablo . cheatsheet.com . Archived from the original on 18 October 2023 . Retrieved 15 May 2021 . Dubdogz - Pablo Escobar feat. Charlott Boss Official Music Video 10 July 2020 retrieved 3 September 2022 Migos - Narcos . Youtube . 27 June 2018. Archived from the original on 18 April 2019 . Retrieved 27 June 2018 . External links Media related to Pablo Escobar at Wikimedia Commons The Abandoned House of Pablo Escobar . noaccess.eu . Archived from the original on 2 September 2015 . Retrieved 18 August 2015 . Pablo Escobar at IMDb Portals : Biography Colombia Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Russia Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Chile Argentina Poland Israel Catalonia Other IdRef Retrieved from https:en.wikipedia.orgwindex.php?titlePabloEscobaroldid1250642084 Categories : Pablo Escobar 1949 births 1993 deaths 20th-century criminals Colombian drug traffickers Colombian mass murderers Colombian crime bosses Medellin Cartel traffickers Folk saints Colombian people of Basque descent Colombian people of Italian descent Colombian Roman Catholics Members of the Chamber of Representatives of Colombia People from Rionegro People shot dead by law enforcement officers in Colombia Escobar Gaviria family Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 Spanish-language sources es Webarchive template wayback links Articles with dead external links from March 2018 Articles with dead external links from March 2023 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Wikipedia semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from March 2021 Pages using infobox person with multiple parents Articles with hCards Pages using infobox criminal with unknown parameters Biography with signature Pages with Spanish IPA Articles with hatnote templates targeting a nonexistent page All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from July 2013 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 October 2024 at 16:38 UTC . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view