Princess Margaret Countess of Snowdon - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Donate Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 1 Early life 2 Post-war years Toggle Post-war years subsection 2.1 The Margaret Set 2.2 Romances and the press 19471959 3 Romance with Peter Townsend Toggle Romance with Peter Townsend subsection 3.1 Early relationship 3.2 Marriage proposal 3.3 Press coverage 3.4 End of relationship 4 Marriage to Antony Armstrong-Jones Toggle Marriage to Antony Armstrong-Jones subsection 4.1 Separation and divorce 5 Public life Toggle Public life subsection 5.1 Charity work 6 Illness and death 7 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 7.1 Image 7.2 Fashion and style 7.3 Finances 7.4 In popular culture 8 Titles styles honours and arms Toggle Titles styles honours and arms subsection 8.1 Titles and styles 8.2 Honours 8.2.1 Foreign honours 8.2.2 Honorary military appointments 8.3 Awards 8.4 Arms 9 Issue 10 Ancestry 11 References 12 Bibliography 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Princess Margaret Countess of Snowdon 57 languages Afrikaans nglisc Asturianu Azrbaycanca Catala Cestina Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Espanol Euskara Francais Gaeilge Hausa Bahasa Indonesia Islenska Italiano Latina Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmal Ozbekcha Polski Portugues Romana Sicilianu Simple English Slovencina srpski Suomi Svenska Turkce Tieng Viet Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia British princess 19302002 Princess Margaret redirects here. For other uses see Princess Margaret disambiguation . Princess Margaret Countess of Snowdon more Margaret in 1965 Born Princess Margaret Rose of York 1930-08-21 21 August 1930 Glamis Castle Angus Scotland Died 9 February 2002 2002-02-09 aged 71 King Edward VIIs Hospital London England Burial 15 February 2002 Ashes placed in the Royal Vault St Georges Chapel 9 April 2002 Ashes interred in the King George VI Memorial Chapel St Georges Chapel Spouse Antony Armstrong-Jones 1st Earl of Snowdon m. 1960 ; div. 1978 Issue David Armstrong-Jones 2nd Earl of Snowdon Lady Sarah Chatto House Windsor Father George VI Mother Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon Signature Princess Margaret Countess of Snowdon Margaret Rose; 21 August 1930 9 February 2002 was the younger daughter of King George VI and Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother . She was the younger sister and only sibling of Queen Elizabeth II . Margaret was born when her parents were the Duke and Duchess of York and she spent much of her childhood with them and her elder sister. Her life changed at the age of six when her father succeeded to the British throne following the abdication of his brother Edward VIII . Margarets sister became heir presumptive with Margaret second in line to the throne. Her position in the line of succession diminished over the following decades as Elizabeths children and grandchildren were born. During the Second World War the two sisters stayed at Windsor Castle despite suggestions to evacuate them to Canada. During the war years Margaret was too young to perform official duties and continued her education being nine years old when the war broke out and turning fifteen just after hostilities ended. From the 1950s onwards Margaret became one of the worlds most celebrated socialites famed for her glamorous lifestyle and reputed romances. Most famously she fell in love in the early 1950s with Peter Townsend a married RAF officer in the royal household. In 1952 her father died her sister became queen and Townsend divorced his wife. He proposed to Margaret early in the following year. Many in the government believed that he would be an unsuitable husband for the Queens 22-year-old sister and the Archbishop of Canterbury refused to countenance her marriage to a divorced man. 1 Margaret abandoned her plans with Townsend. In 1960 she married Antony Armstrong-Jones whom Elizabeth created Earl of Snowdon . The couple had two children David and Sarah . Margarets marriage to Lord Snowdon became strained with both of them engaging in extramarital affairs. They separated in 1976 and divorced in 1978. Margaret did not remarry. Margaret was a controversial member of the British royal family . Her divorce received much negative publicity and her private life was for many years the subject of speculation by media and royal watchers. Her health deteriorated in the last twenty years of her life. She was a heavy smoker for most of her adult life and had a lung operation in 1985 and a bout of pneumonia in 1993 as well as three strokes between 1998 and 2001. Margaret died in 2002 aged 71 after suffering her fourth stroke. Early life edit Princess Margaret was born at 9:22 p.m. on 21 August 1930 at Glamis Castle in Scotland 2 her mothers ancestral home 3 and was affectionately known as Margot within the royal family. 4 She was the first member of the royal family in direct line of succession to be born in Scotland since the 1600s. 5 She was delivered by Sir Henry Simson the royal obstetrician. 6 The Home Secretary J. R. Clynes was present to verify the birth. The registration of her birth was delayed for several days to avoid her being numbered thirteen in the parish register . 7 Margaret was baptised in the private chapel of Buckingham Palace on 30 October 1930 by Cosmo Lang the Archbishop of Canterbury . 9 At the time of her birth Margaret was fourth in the line of succession to the British throne . She was the younger daughter of Prince Albert Duke of York later King George VI and Elizabeth Duchess of York later Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother. Her father was the second son of King George V and Queen Mary and her mother was the youngest daughter of Claude Bowes-Lyon 14th Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne and Cecilia Bowes-Lyon Countess of Strathmore and Kinghorne . The Duchess of York originally wanted to name her second daughter Ann Margaret as she explained to Queen Mary in a letter: I am very anxious to call her Ann Margaret as I think Ann of York sounds pretty Elizabeth and Ann go so well together. 10 George V disliked the name Ann but approved of the alternative Margaret Rose. 11 Margarets early life was spent primarily at the Yorks residences at 145 Piccadilly their town house in London and Royal Lodge in Windsor. 12 The Yorks were perceived by the public as an ideal family 13 but unfounded rumours that Margaret was deaf and mute were not completely dispelled until her first main public appearance at her uncle Prince Georges wedding in 1934. 14 Margaret front with her grandmother Mary and sister Elizabeth May 1939 Margaret was educated alongside her sister Elizabeth by their Scottish governess Marion Crawford . Margarets education was mainly supervised by her mother who in the words of Randolph Churchill never aimed at bringing her daughters up to be more than nicely behaved young ladies . 15 When Queen Mary insisted upon the importance of education the Duchess of York commented I dont know what she meant. After all I and my sisters only had governesses and we all married well one of us very well . 16 Margaret was resentful about her limited education especially in later years and aimed criticism at her mother. 16 However Margarets mother told a friend that she regretted that her daughters did not go to school like other children 17 and the employment of a governess rather than sending the girls to school may have been done only at the insistence of their grandfather George V. 18 J. M. Barrie author of Peter Pan read stories to the sisters as children. 19 Margarets grandfather died in January 1936 and her uncle acceded to the throne as Edward VIII . Less than a year later in December 1936 Edward abdicated to marry Wallis Simpson a twice-divorced American whom neither the Church of England nor the Dominion governments would accept as queen. The Church did not recognise the marriage of a divorced woman with a living ex-husband as valid. Edwards abdication made Margarets father reluctantly assume the throne and Margaret became second in line to the throne with the title The Princess Margaret to indicate her status as a child of the sovereign. 20 The family moved into Buckingham Palace; Margarets room overlooked The Mall . 21 Elizabeth and Margaret performing at Windsor Castle in a 1943 production of the pantomime Aladdin Margaret was a Brownie in the 1st Buckingham Palace Brownie Pack formed in 1937. She was also a Girl Guide and later a Sea Ranger. She served as President of Girlguiding UK from 1965 until her death on 9 February 2002. 22 23 At the outbreak of World War II Princesses Margaret and Elizabeth were at Birkhall on the Balmoral Castle estate where they stayed until Christmas 1939 enduring nights so cold that drinking water in carafes by their bedside froze. 24 They spent Christmas at Sandringham House before moving to Windsor Castle just outside London for much of the remainder of the war. 25 Lord Hailsham wrote to Winston Churchill to advise the evacuation of the princesses to the greater safety of Canada 26 to which their mother famously replied The children wont go without me. I wont leave without the King. And the King will never leave. 27 At Windsor the princesses staged pantomimes at Christmas in aid of the Queens Wool Fund which bought yarn to knit into military garments. 28 In 1940 Margaret sat next to Elizabeth during their radio broadcast for the BBC s Childrens Hour addressing other children who had been evacuated from cities. 29 Margaret spoke at the end by wishing all the children goodnight. 29 Princess Margaret appeared on a 1943 postage stamp in New Zealand Unlike other members of the royal family Margaret was not expected to undertake any public or official duties during the war. She developed her skills at singing and playing the piano 30 often show tunes from stage musicals. 31 Her contemporaries thought she was spoiled by her parents especially her father 32 who allowed her to take liberties not usually permissible such as being allowed to stay up to dinner at the age of thirteen. 16 Crawford despaired at the attention Margaret was getting writing to friends: Could you this year only ask Princess Elizabeth to your party? ... Princess Margaret does draw all the attention and Princess Elizabeth lets her do that. Elizabeth however did not mind this and commented Oh its so much easier when Margarets thereeverybody laughs at what Margaret says . 16 Their father described Elizabeth as his pride and Margaret as his joy. 33 When Elizabeth joined the Auxiliary Territorial Service in 1945 Margaret became extremely jealous lamenting I was born too late! as she was too young to join herself. 34 Post-war years edit Margaret far right on the balcony of Buckingham Palace with her family and Winston Churchill 8 May 1945 At the end of the war in 1945 Margaret appeared on the balcony at Buckingham Palace with her family and Winston Churchill. Afterwards both Elizabeth and Margaret joined the crowds outside the palace incognito chanting We want the King we want the Queen! 35 They both joined in on the festivities with their fellow British citizens such as playing the hokey cokey Lambeth Walk and conga . I remember lines of unknown people linking arms and walking down Whitehall and all of us were swept along by tides of happiness and relief Elizabeth later recalled. 36 Margaret and Elizabeth were terrified of being recognised so they did their best to stay hidden in plain sight. 37 On 15 April 1946 Margaret was confirmed into the Church of England . 38 On 1 February 1947 she Elizabeth and their parents embarked on a state tour of Southern Africa. The three-month-long visit was Margarets first visit abroad and she later claimed that she remembered every minute of it . 39 Her chaperon was Peter Townsend the Kings equerry 40 and very firm toward Margaret whom he apparently considered an indulged child. 41 In November 1947 Margaret was a bridesmaid at the wedding of Princess Elizabeth and Philip Mountbatten . In the next three years Elizabeth and Philip had two children Prince Charles and Princess Anne whose births moved Margaret further down the line of succession. 42 In 1950 the former royal governess Marion Crawford published an unauthorized biography of Elizabeths and Margarets childhood years titled The Little Princesses in which she described Margarets light-hearted fun and frolics 43 and her amusing and outrageous ... antics . 44 The Margaret Set edit Around the time of Elizabeths wedding the press started to follow the social life of unconventional Margaret and her reputation for vivacity and wit. 45 A young woman with vivid blue eyes 46 Margaret enjoyed socialising with high society and young aristocrats including Sharman Douglas the daughter of the American ambassador Lewis Williams Douglas . 47 A celebrated beauty known for her glamour and fashion sense Margaret was often featured in the press at balls parties and nightclubs 48 with friends who became known as the Margaret Set . 49 The number of her official engagements increased they included a tour of Italy Switzerland and France and she joined a growing number of charitable organisations as president or patron. 50 Margaret in Amsterdam Netherlands in 1948 Favoured haunts of the Margaret Set were The 400 Club the Cafe de Paris and the Mirabelle restaurant. 51 Anticipation of an engagement or romance between Margaret and a member of her set were often reported. In 1948 international news grew that her engagement to the Marquess of Blandford would be announced on her 18th birthday. 52 Similar speculation moved to the Hon. Peter Ward then Billy Wallace and others. The set also mixed with celebrities including Danny Kaye whom she met after watching him perform at the London Palladium in February 1948. 53 He was soon accepted by the royal social circle. 54 In July 1949 at a fancy dress ball at the US ambassadors residence Margaret performed the can-can on stage accompanied by Douglas and ten other costumed girls. A press commotion ensued with Kaye denying he had taught Margaret the dance. 55 Press interest could be intrusive. During a private visit to Paris in 1951 Margaret and Prince Nicholas of Yugoslavia were followed into a nightclub by a paparazzo who took photographs of them until British detectives physically removed him from the club. 56 In 1952 although Margaret attended parties and debutante balls with friends such as Douglas and Mark Bonham Carter the set were seen infrequently together. 57 They regrouped in time for Coronation season social functions. In May 1953 Margaret met singer Eddie Fisher when he performed at the Red White and Blue Ball. She asked him to her table and he was invited to all sorts of parties . 58 Margaret fell out with him in 1957 but years later Fisher still claimed the night he was introduced to her was the greatest thrill of his lifetime. 59 In June 1954 the Set performed the Edgar Wallace play The Frog at the Scala Theatre . It was organised by Margarets by now best girlfriend Judy Montagu with Margaret as assistant director. It drew praise for raising 10 500 for charity but criticism for incompetent performances. 60 By the mid-1950s although still seen at fashionable nightspots and theatre premieres the set was depleted by its members getting married. As she reached her late twenties unmarried the press increasingly turned from predicting whom she might marry to suspecting she would remain a spinster. 61 Romances and the press 19471959 edit The press avidly discussed the worlds most eligible bachelor-girl 62 and her alleged romances with more than 30 bachelors 63 64 including David Mountbatten Michael I of Romania 65 Dominic Elliot 66 Colin Tennant later Baron Glenconner 67 Prince Henry of Hesse-Kassel 68 and future Canadian prime minister John Turner . 69 70 Most had titles and almost all were wealthy. Lord Blandford and Lord Dalkeith both wealthy sons of dukes were the likeliest potential husbands. Her family reportedly hoped that Margaret would marry Dalkeith but unlike him Margaret was uninterested in the outdoors. 64 71 Billy Wallace sole heir to a 2.8 million 93 million today fortune and an old friend was reportedly Margarets favourite date during the mid-1950s. 62 72 During her 21st birthday party at Balmoral in August 1951 73 the press was disappointed to only photograph Margaret with Townsend 63 always in the background of pictures of royal appearances 74 64 and to her parents a safe companion as Elizabeths duties increased. 64 The following month her father underwent surgery for lung cancer and Margaret was appointed one of the Counsellors of State who undertook the Kings official duties while he was incapacitated. 75 Her father died five months later on 6 February 1952 and her sister acceded as Elizabeth II. 76 Romance with Peter Townsend edit Early relationship edit During the war the King suggested choosing palace aides who were highly qualified men from the military instead of only aristocrats. Told that a handsome war hero had arrived 49 the princesses met Townsend the new equerry on his first day at Buckingham Palace in 1944; Elizabeth reportedly told her sister 13 years old Bad luck hes married . 77 A temporary assignment of three months from the RAF became permanent. The King and Queen were fond of Townsend; the King reportedly saw the calm and efficient combat veteran as the son he never had. 78 77 64 He may have been aware of Margarets infatuation with the non-titled and non-wealthy Townsend reportedly seeing the courtier reluctantly obey the princesss order to carry her up palace stairs after a party. 64 Townsend was so often near Margaret that gossip columnists overlooked him as a suitor for the princess. 74 When their relationship began is unclear. Margaret told friends she fell in love with him during the 1947 South Africa tour where they often went riding together. 79 Her biographer Craig Brown stated that according to a National Trust curator Townsend requested the bedroom next to hers during a trip to Belfast in October 1947. 80 In November 1948 they attended the inauguration of Queen Juliana of the Netherlands . In later life Townsend admitted at this point there was an attraction between them but neither of them ever acknowledged it to one another. Not long after he discovered his wife Rosemary was involved in an extramarital affair which ended. 81 Contemporary anecdotes about their closeness then dissipated until late 1950 when friendship seems to have rekindled coinciding with Townsends appointment as Deputy Master of the Household and the breakdown of his marriage. 82 From the spring of 1951 came several testimonies of a growing romantic attraction. A footman told how the King diverted the pairs picnic plans adding that whatever the King and Queen knew about the developing relationship few royal staff failed to notice as it was obvious to them. 83 Townsend said that his love for her began in Balmoral in 1951 and recalled an incident there in August when the princess woke him from a nap after a picnic lunch while the King watched to suggest the King knew. 84 Townsend and his wife separated in 1951 85 which was noticed by the press by July. 86 Margaret was grief-stricken by her fathers death and was prescribed sedatives to help her sleep. 87 Of her father she wrote He was such a wonderful person the very heart and centre of our happy family. 88 She was consoled by her deeply held Christian beliefs 89 sometimes attending church twice daily. 64 She re-emerged attending events with her family in April and returned to public duties and the social scene when official mourning ended in June. American newspapers noted her increasing vitality and speculated that she must be in love. 90 With the widowed Queen Mother Margaret moved out of Buckingham Palace and into Clarence House in May 1953 while the new queen and her family moved out of Clarence House and into Buckingham Palace. 91 After George VIs death Townsend was appointed Comptroller of the Queen Mothers household . 92 In June 1952 the estranged Townsends hosted Margaret along with her sister Elizabeth and brother-in-law Philip at a cocktail party at their home. 93 94 A month later Rosemary Townsend and her new partner John de Laszlo attended judging at the Royal Windsor Horse Show . 95 It is thought the romance between Margaret and Townsend began around this time. 96 The first reports that Townsend and Margaret wished to marry began in August 1952 97 but these remained uncommon. The Townsend divorce in November was mentioned little in Britain and in greater detail abroad. 98 After the divorce was finalized in December 1952 however rumours spread about him and Margaret; 64 the divorce and shared grief over the Kings death in February 1952 likely helped them come together 77 within the privacy of Clarence House where Margaret had her own apartment. 79 Marriage proposal edit Private Secretary to the Queen Sir Alan Lascelles wrote that Townsend told Lascelles he had asked Margaret to marry him shortly before Christmas 1952. 99 Other sources claim it occurred in February or April 1953. 63 100 He was 15 years her senior and had two children from his previous marriage. Margaret accepted and informed her sister the Queen whose consent was required by the Royal Marriages Act 1772 . During the abdication crisis the Church of England had refused to countenance the remarriage of the divorced. Queen Mary had recently died and after the coronation of Elizabeth II the new queen planned to tour the Commonwealth for six months. She told her sister Under the circumstances it isnt unreasonable for me to ask you to wait a year 101 and to keep the relationship secret until after the coronation. 78 Following Elizabeth IIs coronation the royal family appeared on the balcony of Buckingham Palace on June 2 1953. Margaret can be seen fourth from right exactly next to the boys in black. Although foreign media speculated on Margaret and Townsends relationship the British press did not. After reporters saw her plucking fluff from his coat during the coronation on 2 June 1953 I never thought a thing about it and neither did Margaret Townsend later said; After that the storm broke 63 79 The People first mentioned the relationship in Britain 102 on 14 June. With the headline They Must Deny it NOW 84 the front-page article warned that scandalous rumours about Princess Margaret are racing around the world which the newspaper stated were of course utterly untrue . 49 103 The foreign press believed that the Regency Act 1953 which made Prince Philip regent instead of Margaret on the Queens deathwas enacted to allow Margaret to marry Townsend but as late as 23 July most other British newspapers except the Daily Mirror did not discuss the rumours. Acting Prime Minister Rab Butler asked that the deplorable speculation end without mentioning Margaret or Townsend. 74 104 The constitutional crisis that the proposed marriage caused was public. 78 The Queen was advised by Lascelles to post Townsend abroad but she refused and instead transferred him from the Queen Mothers household to her own 105 although Townsend did not accompany Margaret as planned on a tour of Southern Rhodesia. 64 Winston Churchill personally approved of a lovely young royal lady married to a gallant young airman but Clementine Churchill reminded her husband that he had made the same mistake during the abdication crisis. 106 102 The Cabinet refused to approve the marriage 107 and Geoffrey Fisher Archbishop of Canterbury did not approve of Margaret marrying a divorced man; opponents said that the marriage would threaten the monarchy as Edward VIIIs had. 64 The Church of England Newspaper said that Margaret is a dutiful churchwoman who knows what strong views leaders of the church hold in this matter but the Sunday Express which had supported Edward and Wallisasked IF THEY WANT TO MARRY WHY SHOULDNT THEY? . 74 Churchill discussed the marriage at the 1953 Commonwealth Prime Ministers Conference held with the coronation; the Statute of Westminster 1931 requires Dominion parliaments to also approve any Bill of Renunciation changing the line of succession. The Canadian government stated that altering the line twice in 25 years would harm the monarchy. 71 Churchill informed the Queen that both his cabinet and Dominion prime ministers were against the marriage and that Parliament would not approve a marriage that would be unrecognised by the Church of England unless Margaret renounced her rights to the throne. 108 106 Philip was reportedly the most opposed to Townsend in the royal family while Margarets mother and sister wanted her to be happy but could not approve of the marriage. Besides Townsends divorce two major problems were financial and constitutional. Margaret did not possess her sisters large fortune and would need the 6 000 annual civil list allowance and 15 000 additional allowance Parliament had provided for her upon a suitable marriage. She did not object to being removed from the line of succession to the throne as Elizabeth and all her children dying was unlikely but receiving parliamentary approval for the marriage would be difficult and uncertain. 64 41 At the age of 25 Margaret would not need the Queens permission under the 1772 Act; 109 she could after notifying the Privy Council of the United Kingdom marry in one year if Parliament did not prevent her. Churchill told Elizabeth however that if one could easily leave the line of succession another could easily enter the line dangerous for a hereditary monarchy . 71 Elizabeth told the couple to wait until 1955 when Margaret would be 25 109 avoiding the Queen having to publicly disapprove of her sisters marriage. 64 Lascelleswho compared Townsend to Theudas boasting himself to be somebody hoped that separating him and Margaret would end their romance. 110 Churchill arranged for Townsends assignment as air attache at the British Embassy in Brussels; he was sent on 15 July 1953 before Margarets return from Rhodesia on 30 July. 106 The assignment was so sudden that the British ambassador learnt about it from a newspaper. Although Margaret and Townsend knew about his new job they had reportedly been promised a few days together before his departure. 71 Press coverage edit For two years press speculation continued. In Brussels Townsend only said that The word must come from somebody else . He avoided parties and being seen with women. With few duties the sinecure was abolished after him Townsend improved his French and horsemanship. He joined a Belgian show jumping club and rode in races around Europe. 71 Margaret was told by the Church that she would be unable to receive communion if she married a divorced man. 111 Three quarters of Sunday Express readers opposed the relationship and Mass-Observation recorded criticism of the silly little fool as a poor example for young women who emulated her. 84 Other newspaper polls showed popular support for Margarets personal choice regardless of Church teaching or government. 112 Ninety-seven per cent of Daily Mirror readers supported marriage and a Daily Express editorial stated that even if the Archbishop of Canterbury was displeased she would best please the vast majority of ordinary folk by finding happiness for herself . 64 71 The couple were not restricted on communicating by mail and telephone. 64 71 Margaret worked with friends on charity productions of Lord and Lady Algy and The Frog and publicly dated men such as Tennant 49 and Wallace. 62 In January 1955 she made the first of many trips to the Caribbean perhaps to distract and as a reward for being apart from Townsend. The attache secretly travelled to Britain; while the palace was aware of one visit he reportedly made other trips for nights and weekends with the princess at Clarence Househer apartment had its own front doorand friends homes. 49 64 Margaret greeting schoolchildren at the opening of The Princess Margaret School in Barbados 9 February 1955 That spring Townsend for the first time spoke to the press: I am sick of being made to hide in my apartment like a thief but whether he could marry involves more people than myself . He reportedly believed that his exile from Margaret would soon end 71 their love was strong and that the British people would support marrying. 64 Townsend received a bodyguard and police guard around his apartment after the Belgian government received threats on his life 71 but the British government still said nothing. Stating that people were more interested in the couple than the recent 1955 United Kingdom general election on 29 May the Daily Express published an editorial demanding that Buckingham Palace confirm or deny the rumours. 113 The press described Margarets 25th birthday 21 August 1955 as the day she was free to marry 71 and expected an announcement about Townsend soon. Three hundred journalists waited outside Balmoral four times as many as those later following Diana Princess of Wales . 49 COME ON MARGARET! the Daily Mirror s front page said two days earlier asking her to please make up your mind! . 64 114 On 12 October Townsend returned from Brussels as Margarets suitor. The royal family devised a system in which it did not host Townsend but he and Margaret formally courted each other at dinner parties hosted by friends 71 such as Mark Bonham Carter . 115 116 A Gallup poll found that 59 of Britons approved of their marrying with 17 opposed. 114 84 Women in the East End of London shouted Go on Marg do what you want at the princess. 102 Although the couple was never seen together in public during this time 103 the general consensus was that they would marry. Crowds waited outside Clarence House and a global audience read daily updates and rumours on newspaper front pages. 114 115 117 118 119 Nothing much else than Princess Margarets affairs is being talked of in this country The Manchester Guardian said on 15 October. NOW THE NATION WAITS was a typical headline. 114 Observers interpreted Buckingham Palaces request to the press to respect Margarets privacythe first time the palace discussed the princesss recent personal lifeas evidence of an imminent betrothal announcement 118 71 120 probably before the Opening of Parliament on 25 October. 117 As no announcement occurredthe Daily Mirror on 17 October showed a photograph of Margarets left hand with the headline NO RING YET! 114 the press wondered why. Parliamentarians are frankly puzzled by the way the affair has been handled the News Chronicle wrote. If a marriage is on they ask why not announce it quickly? If there is to be no marriage why allow the couple to continue to meet without a clear denial of the rumours? 115 Why a betrothal did not occur is unclear. Margaret may have been uncertain of her desire having written to Prime Minister Anthony Eden in August that It is only by seeing him in this way that I feel I can properly decide whether I can marry him or not . 109 Margarets authorized biographer Christopher Warwick said that the letter was evidence that her love for Townsend was not as strong as the public believed and that she wanted only the prime minister and Elizabeth to know of her uncertainty. 121 Margaret may have told Townsend as early as 12 October that governmental and familial opposition to their marriage had not changed; it is possible that neither they nor Elizabeth fully understood until that year how difficult the 1772 Act made a royal marriage without the monarchs permission. 49 An influential 26 October editorial in The Times stating that The QUEENs sister married to a divorced man even though the innocent party would be irrevocably disqualified from playing her part in the essential royal function represented The Establishment s view of what it considered a possibly dangerous crisis. 114 103 It convinced many who had believed that the media were exaggerating that Margaret really might defy the Church and royal standards. Leslie Weatherhead President of the Methodist Conference now criticized the proposed marriage. 107 Townsend recalled that we felt mute and numbed at the centre of this maelstrom ; 84 Elizabeth also wanted the media circus to end. 77 Townsend only had his RAF income and other than a talent for writing had no experience in other work. 71 He wrote in his autobiography that Margaret could have married me only if she had been prepared to give up everything -- her position her prestige her privy purse. I simply hadnt the weight I knew it to counterbalance all she would have lost 120 for what Kenneth Rose described as life in a cottage on a Group Captain s salary . 77 Royal historian Hugo Vickers wrote that Lascelless separation plan had worked and the love between them had died . 110 Warwick said that having spent two years apart they were no longer as in love as they had been. Townsend was not the love of her life the love of her life was her father King George VI whom she adored . 31 More than 100 journalists waited at Balmoral when Eden arrived to discuss the marriage with Elizabeth and Margaret on 1 October 1955. 71 Lord Kilmuir the Lord Chancellor that month prepared a secret government document on the proposed marriage. 64 49 According to a 1958 biography of Townsend by Norman Barrymaine and other accounts Eden said that his government would oppose in Parliament Margaret retaining her royal status. Parliament might pass resolutions opposing the marriage which the people would see as a disagreement between government and monarchy; Lord Salisbury a High Anglican might resign from the government rather than help pass a Bill of Renunciation. While the government could not prevent the marriage when Margaret became a private individual after a Bill of Renunciation she would no longer be a Counsellor of State and would lose her civil list allowance; otherwise taxpayers would subsidise a divorced man and his sons. The Church would consider any children from the marriage to be illegitimate. Eden recommended that like her uncle Edward and his wife Wallis Margaret and Townsend leave Britain 71 77 for several years. 49 103 120 Papers released in 2004 to the National Archives disagree. They show that Elizabeth and Eden who had been divorced and remarried himself planned to amend the 1772 Act. Margaret would have been able to marry Townsend by removing her and any children from the marriage from the line of succession and thus the Queens permission would no longer be necessary. Margaret would be allowed to keep her royal title and her allowance stay in the country and even continue with her public duties. Eden described Elizabeths attitude in a letter on the subject to the Commonwealth prime ministers as Her Majesty would not wish to stand in the way of her sisters happiness . Eden himself was sympathetic; Exclusion from the Succession would not entail any other change in Princess Margarets position as a member of the Royal Family he wrote. 109 On 28 October 1955 final draft of the plan Margaret would announce that she would marry Townsend and leave the line of succession. As prearranged by Eden the Queen would consult with the British and Commonwealth governments and then ask them to amend the 1772 Act. Eden would have told Parliament that the Act was out of harmony with modern conditions . Kilmuir had advised Eden that the 1772 Act was flawed and might not apply to Margaret anyway. Kilmuir estimated that 75 of Britons would approve of allowing the marriage. 109 The August letter to Eden is evidence Warwick said that Margaret was aware of the governments intention to preserve her title and allowance. 121 The decision not to marry was made on the 24th and for the following week Margaret worked on the wording of her statement which was released on the 31st. 122 It is unclear what or when she was told about the government proposal drafted on the 28th. By the early 1980s she was still protesting to biographers that the couple had been given false hope marriage was possible and she would have ended the relationship sooner had she been informed otherwise. 123 124 The Daily Mirror on 28 October discussed The Times s editorial with the headline THIS CRUEL PLAN MUST BE EXPOSED . Although Margaret and Townsend had read the editorial the newspaper denounced as from a dusty world and a forgotten age they had earlier made their decision and written an announcement. 103 107 End of relationship edit On 31 October 1955 Margaret issued a statement: I would like it to be known that I have decided not to marry Group Captain Peter Townsend. I have been aware that subject to my renouncing my rights of succession it might have been possible for me to contract a civil marriage . But mindful of the Churchs teachings that Christian marriage is indissoluble and conscious of my duty to the Commonwealth I have resolved to put these considerations before others. I have reached this decision entirely alone and in doing so I have been strengthened by the unfailing support and devotion of Group Captain Townsend. 125 Thoroughly drained thoroughly demoralized Margaret later said 63 she and Townsend wrote the statement together. She refused when Oliver Dawnay the Queen Mothers private secretary asked to remove the word devotion . 71 49 The written statement signed Margaret was the first official confirmation of the relationship. Some Britons were disbelieving or angry while others including clergy were proud of Margaret for choosing duty and faith; 119 newspapers were evenly divided on the decision. Mass-Observation recorded indifference or criticism of the couple among men but great interest among women whether for or against. Kenneth Tynan John Minton Ronald Searle and others signed an open letter from the younger generation . Published in the Daily Express on 4 November the letter said that the end of the relationship had exposed The Establishment and our national hypocrisy . 114 Townsend recalled that We had reached the end of the road our feelings for one another were unchanged but they had incurred for us a burden so great that we decided together to lay it down . 63 The Associated Press said that Margarets statement was almost a rededication of her life to the duties of royalty making unlikely any marriage for her in the near future ; 119 the princess may have expected to never marry after the long relationship ended because most of her eligible male friends were no longer bachelors. 126 Barrymaine agreed that Margaret intended the statement to mean that she would never marry but wrote that Townsend likely did not accept any such vow to him by the princess and his subsequent departure from Britain for two years was to not interfere with her life. 71 We both had a feeling of unimaginable relief. We were liberated at last from this monstrous problem Townsend said. 84 After resigning from the RAF and travelling around the world for 18 months Townsend returned in March 1958; he and Margaret met several times but could not avoid the press TOGETHER AGAIN or royal disapproval. Townsend again left Britain to write a book about his trip; Barrymaine concluded in 1958 that none of the fundamental obstacles to their marriage has been overcome or shows any prospects of being overcome . 71 49 Townsend said during a 1970 book tour that he and Margaret did not correspond and they had not seen each other since a friendly 1958 meeting just like I think a lot of people never see their old girl friends . 127 Their love letters are in the Royal Archives and will not be available to the public until 100 years after Margarets birth February 2030. 63 These are unlikely to include Margarets letters. In 1959 she wrote to Townsend in response to him informing her of his remarriage plans accusing him of betraying their vow not to marry anyone else and requesting her love letters to him be destroyed. 128 He claimed he complied with her wishes but kept this letter and an envelope of burned shards of the vow she had sent eventually destroying these also. He was apparently unaware Margaret had already broken the pact by her engagement to Billy Wallace as it was not revealed until many years later. 129 In October 1993 a friend of Margaret revealed she had met Townsend for what turned out to be the last time before his death in 1995. She had not wanted to attend the reunion theyd both been invited to in 1992 for fear it might be picked up by the press so she asked to see him privately instead. 130 Margaret said that he looked exactly the same except he had grey hair . 63 Guests said he had not really changed and that they just sat chatting like old friends. They also found him disgruntled and had convinced himself that in agreeing to part he and Margaret had set a noble example which seemed to have been in vain. 131 Billy Wallace later said that The thing with Townsend was a girlish nonsense that got out of hand. It was never the big thing on her part that people claim . 63 Marriage to Antony Armstrong-Jones edit A ticket for the wedding procession Margaret with her husband Lord Snowdon May 1965 Margaret accepted one of Wallaces many proposals to marry in 1956 but the engagement ended before an official announcement when he admitted to a romance in the Bahamas; I had my chance and blew it with my big mouth Wallace said. 63 Margaret did not reveal this publicly until an interview and subsequent biography with Nigel Dempster in 1977. 132 Margaret met the photographer Antony Armstrong-Jones at a supper party in 1958. 133 They became engaged in October 1959. 134 Armstrong-Jones proposed to Margaret with a ruby engagement ring surrounded by diamonds in the shape of a rosebud. 135 136 She reportedly accepted his proposal a day after learning from Townsend that he intended to marry a young Belgian woman 63 Marie-Luce Jamagne who was half his age and greatly resembled Margaret. 137 120 Margarets announcement of her engagement on 26 February 1960 surprised the press as she had concealed the romance from reporters. 138 Margaret married Armstrong-Jones at Westminster Abbey on 6 May 1960. 139 The ceremony was the first royal wedding to be broadcast on television 63 and it attracted viewing figures of 300 million worldwide. 140 2 000 guests were invited for the wedding ceremony. 133 Margarets wedding dress was designed by Norman Hartnell and worn with the Poltimore tiara. 38 She had eight young bridesmaids led by her niece Princess Anne. citation needed The Duke of Edinburgh escorted the bride and the best man was Dr Roger Gilliatt. 133 Archbishop of Canterbury Geoffrey Fisher conducted the marriage service. 133 Following the ceremony the couple made the traditional appearance on the balcony of Buckingham Palace. 133 The honeymoon was a six-week Caribbean cruise aboard the royal yacht Britannia . 141 As a wedding present Colin Tennant gave her a plot of land on his private Caribbean island Mustique . 142 The newlyweds moved into rooms in Kensington Palace . 143 In 1961 Margarets husband was created Earl of Snowdon . The couple had two children both born by Caesarean section at Margarets request : 144 David born 3 November 1961 and Sarah born 1 May 1964. 102 The marriage widened Margarets social circle beyond the court and aristocracy to include show business celebrities and bohemians . At the time it was thought to reflect the breaking down of British class barriers. 145 The Snowdons experimented with the styles and fashions of the 1960s. 146 Separation and divorce edit Both parties in the marriage regularly engaged in extramarital relationships. Lord Snowdon had a series of affairs including with long-term mistress Ann Hills and Lady Jacqueline Rufus-Isaacs daughter of the 3rd Marquess of Reading . Anne De Courcys 2008 biography summarises the situation with a quote from a close friend: If it moves hell have it. 147 Reportedly Margaret had her first extramarital affair in 1966 with her daughters godfather Anthony Barton a Bordeaux wine producer. 148 63 A year later she had a one-month liaison with Robin Douglas-Home a nephew of former British prime minister Alec Douglas-Home. 149 63 Margaret claimed that her relationship with Douglas-Home was platonic but her letters to him which were later sold were intimate. 150 Douglas-Home who suffered from depression died by suicide 18 months after the split with Margaret. 63 Claims that she was romantically involved with musician Mick Jagger 151 actor Peter Sellers and Australian cricketer Keith Miller are unproven. 152 According to biographer Charlotte Breese entertainer Leslie Hutchinson had a brief liaison with Margaret in 1955. 153 A 2009 biography of actor David Niven included assertions based on information from Nivens widow and a good friend of Nivens that he had had an affair with Margaret who was 20 years his junior. 154 In 1975 Margaret was listed among women with whom actor Warren Beatty had had romantic relationships. 155 John Bindon an actor from Fulham who had spent time in prison sold his story to the Daily Mirror boasting of a close relationship with Margaret. 156 Margaret shakes hands with Mayor of Amsterdam Gijs van Hall 14 May 1965 Beyond extramarital relationships the marriage was accompanied by drugs alcohol and bizarre behaviour by both parties such as Snowdons leaving lists of things I hate about you for Margaret to find between the pages of books she read. According to biographer Sarah Bradford one note read: You look like a Jewish manicurist and I hate you . 157 By the early 1970s the couple had drifted apart. In September 1973 Colin Tennant introduced Margaret to Roddy Llewellyn . Llewellyn was 17 years her junior. In 1974 she invited him as a guest to Les Jolies Eaux the holiday home she had built on Mustique. 158 It was the first of several visits. Margaret described their relationship as a loving friendship . 159 Once when Llewellyn left on an impulsive trip to Turkey Margaret became emotionally distraught and took an overdose of sleeping tablets. 160 I was so exhausted because of everything she later said that all I wanted to do was sleep . 161 As she recovered her ladies-in-waiting kept Snowdon away from her afraid that seeing him would distress her further. 162 In February 1976 a picture of Margaret and Llewellyn in swimsuits on Mustique was published on the front page of a tabloid the News of the World . The press portrayed Margaret as a predatory older woman and Llewellyn as her toyboy lover. 163 On 19 March 1976 Margaret and Snowdon publicly acknowledged that their marriage had irretrievably broken down and that they had decided to separate. 164 165 Some politicians suggested removing Margaret from the civil list. Labour MPs denounced her as a royal parasite 166 and a floosie . 167 On 24 May 1978 the decree nisi for the couples divorce was granted. 165 In the same month Margaret was taken ill and diagnosed as suffering from gastroenteritis and alcoholic hepatitis 168 although Warwick denied that she was ever an alcoholic. 31 On 11 July 1978 the divorce was finalized. 169 It was the first divorce of a senior member of the British royal family since that of Princess Victoria Melita of Edinburgh in 1901. Allegedly Margaret did not want a divorce: she tried to make her marriage succeed but there were too many challenges . Devastated by the divorce Margaret never remarried. 170 On 15 December 1978 Snowdon married Lucy Lindsay-Hogg but he and Margaret remained close friends. 171 In 1981 Llewellyn married Tatiana Soskin whom he had known for 10 years. 172 Margaret remained close friends with them both. 173 Public life edit Margaret and Snowdon with Lyndon B. and Lady Bird Johnson at the White House 17 November 1965 Among Margarets first official engagements was launching the ocean liner Edinburgh Castle in Belfast in 1947. 174 Subsequently Margaret went on multiple tours of various places; in her first major tour she joined her parents and sister for a tour of South Africa in 1947. Her tour aboard Britannia to the British colonies in the Caribbean in 1955 created a sensation throughout the West Indies and calypsos were dedicated to her. 175 As colonies of the British Commonwealth of Nations sought nationhood Margaret represented the Crown at independence ceremonies in Jamaica in 1962 176 and Tuvalu and Dominica in 1978. Her visit to Tuvalu was cut short by an illness which may have been viral pneumonia 177 and she was flown to Australia to recuperate. 178 Other overseas tours included East Africa and Mauritius in 1956 the United States in 1965 Japan in 1969 and 1979 179 the United States and Canada in 1974 180 Australia in 1975 181 the Philippines in 1980 182 Swaziland in 1981 183 and China in 1987. 184 In August 1979 Margarets cousin Lord Mountbatten and members of his family were killed by a bomb planted by the Provisional Irish Republican Army . 185 That October while on a fundraising tour of the United States on behalf of the Royal Opera House Margaret was seated at a dinner reception in Chicago with columnist Abra Anderson and Mayor Jane Byrne . Margaret told them that the royal family had been moved by the many letters of condolence from Ireland. 186 The following day Andersons rival Irv Kupcinet published a claim that Margaret had referred to the Irish as pigs . 187 Margaret Anderson and Byrne all issued immediate denials 186 but the damage was already done. 188 The rest of the tour drew demonstrations and Margarets security was doubled in the face of physical threats. 189 Charity work edit Sheildag-Kenmore Road opened by H.R.H. The Princess Margaret Countess of Snowdon on 11th May 1970 sign Margarets main interests were welfare charities music and ballet. 190 She was president of the National Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children NSPCC 190 the Royal Scottish Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Children Children 1st 191 and Invalid Childrens Aid Nationwide also called I CAN. She was also Grand President of the St John Ambulance Brigade. 190 Margaret was president or patron of numerous organisations such as the West Indies Olympic Association the Girl Guides 190 Northern Ballet Theatre 192 Birmingham Royal Ballet 193 Scottish Ballet 191 Tenovus Cancer Care 194 the Royal College of Nursing 194 and the London Lighthouse an AIDS charity that has since merged with the Terrence Higgins Trust . 16 In her capacity as president of the Royal Ballet she played a key role in launching a fund for Dame Margot Fonteyn who was experiencing financial troubles. 195 With the help of the Childrens Royal Variety Performance she also organised yearly fundraisers for NSPCC. 195 At some points Margaret was criticized for not being as active as other members of the royal family. 190 Illness and death edit Margaret in later life Margarets later life was marred by illness and disability. 196 She began smoking cigarettes in her late teens and had continued to smoke heavily for many years thereafter. 197 198 In the 1970s she suffered a nervous breakdown and was treated for depression by a psychiatrist from the Priory Clinic . 199 Later on she suffered from migraines laryngitis and bronchitis . 200 In January 1980 she was operated on at the London Clinic to remove a benign skin lesion . 196 On 5 January 1985 she had part of her left lung removed; the operation drew parallels with that of her father 34 years earlier. 201 She quit smoking in 1991 202 or January 1993 198 although servants still claimed they smelt cigarette smoke in her apartment 198 and she continued to drink heavily. 202 In January 1993 Margaret was admitted to hospital for pneumonia . She experienced a mild stroke on 23 February 1998 at her holiday home in Mustique. 203 Early the following year she suffered severe scalds to her feet in a bathroom accident which affected her mobility in that she required support when walking and sometimes used a wheelchair. 204 She was hospitalized on 10 January 2001 due to loss of appetite and swallowing problems after a further stroke. 205 206 By March 2001 strokes had left her with partial vision and paralysis on the left side. 207 Margarets last public appearances were at the 101st birthday celebrations of her mother in August 2001 and the 100th birthday celebration of her aunt Princess Alice Duchess of Gloucester that December. 208 Margaret died in her sleep at King Edward VIIs Hospital London at 06:30 GMT on 9 February 2002 aged 71 three days after the 50th anniversary of her fathers death. She was 11th in line to the throne at the time of her death. The previous day she had suffered another stroke that was followed by cardiac problems. 209 196 191 Prince Charles paid tribute to his aunt in a television broadcast. 210 211 UK politicians and foreign leaders sent their condolences as well. 212 213 Following her death private memorial services were held at St Mary Magdalene Church and Glamis Castle. 214 Margarets coffin draped in her personal standard was taken from Kensington Palace to St Jamess Palace before her funeral. 215 Her funeral was held on 15 February 2002 the 50th anniversary of her fathers funeral. 216 In line with her wishes the ceremony was a private service at St Georges Chapel Windsor Castle for family and friends. 217 Unlike most other members of the royal family she was cremated at Slough Crematorium. 218 Her lady-in-waiting Lady Glenconner stated that Margaret found the Royal Burial Ground at Frogmore very gloomy and would have wanted to be where her father was buried. 219 Margarets ashes were temporarily placed in the Royal Vault of St Georges Chapel. The Queen Mother died seven weeks after Margaret and Margarets ashes were moved to the King George VI Memorial Chapel in St Georges following her mothers funeral. 220 216 221 A state memorial service was held at Westminster Abbey on 19 April 2002. 222 Another memorial service to mark the 10th anniversary of their deaths was held on 30 March 2012 at St Georges Chapel Windsor Castle which was attended by Queen Elizabeth II and other members of the royal family. 223 Legacy edit Image edit We thank thee Lord who by thy spirit doth our faith restore When we with worldly things commune prayerless close our door We lose our precious gift divine to worship and adore Then thou our Saviour fill our hearts to love thee evermore Princess Margarets epitaph which she wrote herself is carved on a memorial stone in St Georges Chapel Windsor Castle 224 Observers often characterized Margaret as a spoiled snob capable of cutting remarks and hauteur. 225 Critics claimed that she even looked down on her grandmother Queen Mary because Mary was born a princess with the lower Serene Highness style whereas Margaret was a Royal Highness by birth. 226 Their letters however provide no indication of friction between them. 227 Margaret could also be charming and informal. People who came into contact with her could be perplexed by her swings between frivolity and formality. 228 Marion Crawford wrote in her memoir: Impulsive and bright remarks she made became headlines and taken out of their context began to produce in the public eye an oddly distorted personality that bore little resemblance to the Margaret we knew. 229 Margarets acquaintance Gore Vidal the American writer wrote: She was far too intelligent for her station in life . He recalled a conversation with Margaret in which discussing her public notoriety she said: It was inevitable when there are two sisters and one is the Queen who must be the source of honour and all that is good while the other must be the focus of the most creative malice the evil sister . 230 Margaret left and Cliff Richard at the 59 Club London in 1962 As a child Margaret enjoyed pony shows but unlike other family members she did not express interest in hunting shooting and fishing in adulthood. 195 She became interested in ballet from a very young age and enjoyed participating in amateur plays. She directed one such play titled The Frogs with her aristocratic friends as cast members. 195 Actors and film stars were among the regular visitors to her residence at Kensington Palace. 195 In January 1981 she was the guest for an episode of BBC Radio 4s Desert Island Discs . Her musical choices included Sixteen Tons by Tennessee Ernie Ford which she said had entertained her in a traffic jam. Her favourite was Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky s Swan Lake . 231 In 1984 she appeared as herself in an episode of the radio drama The Archers becoming the first member of the royal family to take part in a BBC drama. 232 Margarets private life was for many years the subject of intense speculation by media and royalty watchers. Her house on Mustique designed by her husbands uncle Oliver Messel a stage designer was her favourite holiday destination. 233 Allegations of wild parties and drug taking also surfaced in the media. 234 Margaret was a devout Christian her whole life though she had desires that often conflicted with her faith . 170 At one point she considered becoming Catholic . 235 Following Margarets death her lady-in-waiting Lady Glenconner said that Margaret was devoted to the Queen and tremendously supportive of her . 236 Margaret was described by her cousin Lady Elizabeth Shakerley as somebody who had a wonderful capacity for giving a lot of people pleasure and she was making a very very very good and loyal friend . 237 Another cousin Lord Lichfield said that Margaret was pretty sad towards the end of her life because it was a life unfulfilled . 236 The Independent wrote in Townsends 1995 obituary that The immense display of popular sentiment and interest in the relationship can now be seen to have constituted a watershed in the nations attitude towards divorce . 41 The Archbishop of Canterbury and the Church received much of the popular anger toward the end of the relationship. 114 Randolph Churchill believed that rumours that Fisher had intervened to prevent the Princess from marrying Townsend has done incalculable harm to the Church of England ; 106 a Gallup poll found that 28 agreed and 59 disagreed with the Churchs refusal to remarry a divorced person while the other spouse was alive. 114 Biographer Warwick suggests that Margarets most enduring legacy is an accidental one. Perhaps unwittingly Margaret paved the way for public acceptance of royal divorce. Her life if not her actions made the decisions and choices of her sisters children three of whom divorced easier than they otherwise would have been. 238 Eden reportedly told Elizabeth in Balmoral when discussing Margaret and Townsend that regardless of outcome the monarchy would be damaged. 71 In 1995 Harold Brooks-Baker was quoted in Townsends obituary: In my opinion this was the turning point to disaster for the royal family. After Princess Margaret was denied marriage it backfired and more or less ruined Margarets life. The Queen decided that from then on anyone someone in her family wanted to marry would be more or less acceptable. The royal family and the public now feel that theyve gone too far in the other direction . 120 Fashion and style edit Margaret in 1965 During her lifetime Margaret was considered a fashion icon. 239 240 241 Her fashion earned the nickname The Margaret Look. 241 The princess dubbed a royal rebel styled herself in contrast to her sisters prim and timeless style adopting trendy mod accessories such as brightly coloured headscarves and glamorous sunglasses. 239 242 243 Margaret developed a close relationship with atelier Christian Dior wearing his designs throughout her life and becoming one of his most prominent customers. In 1950 he designed a cream gown worn for her 21st birthday which has been cited as an iconic part of fashion history. 244 245 246 Throughout the decade Margaret was known for wearing floral-print dresses bold-hued ballgowns and luxurious fabrics accessorising with diamonds pearls and fur stoles. 243 242 British Vogue wrote that Margarets style hit her stride in the mid-60s where she was photographed alongside celebrities like The Beatles Frank Sinatra and Sophia Loren . 247 Margaret was also known for her magnificent hats and headdresses including a canary feather hat worn on a 1962 Jamaica visit and a peacock feather pillbox hat to the 1973 Royal Ascot . 243 Marie Claire stated that the princess refused to compromise on her style later in life continuing with trends of big sleeves and strapless evening gowns . 243 In April 2007 an exhibition titled Princess Line The Fashion Legacy of Princess Margaret opened at Kensington Palace showcasing contemporary fashion from British designers such as Vivienne Westwood inspired by Margarets legacy of style. Christopher Baileys Spring 2006 collection for Burberry was inspired by Margarets look from the 1960s. 248 Finances edit In her lifetime Margarets fortune was estimated to be around 20 million with most of it being inherited from her father. 249 She also inherited pieces of art and antiques from Queen Mary and Dame Margaret Greville left her 20 000 in 1943. 249 In 1999 her son Lord Linley sold his mothers Caribbean residence Les Jolies Eaux for a reported 2.4 million. 249 At the time of her death Margaret received 219 000 from the civil list. 249 Following her death she left a 7.6 million estate to her two children which was cut down to 4.5 million after inheritance tax . 249 In June 2006 much of Margarets estate was auctioned by Christies to meet the tax and in her sons words normal family requirements such as educating her grandchildren 250 though some of the items were sold in aid of charities such as the Stroke Association . 251 Reportedly Elizabeth had made it clear that the proceeds from any item that was given to her sister in an official capacity must be donated to charities. 252 A world record price of 1.24 million was set by a Faberge clock. 253 The Poltimore Tiara which she wore for her wedding in 1960 sold for 926 400. 254 The sale of her effects totalled 13 658 000. 254 255 In popular culture edit Actresses who have portrayed Margaret include Lucy Cohu The Queens Sister 2005 Katie McGrath The Queen 2009 256 Ramona Marquez The Kings Speech 2010 Bel Powley A Royal Night Out 2015 Olivia Benjamin Father Brown 2023 and Vanessa Kirby Helena Bonham Carter and Lesley Manville who all played different stages of Margarets life during The Crown 20162023. 257 258 The young Princess Margaret was played by Beau Gadsdon. 259 The 2008 heist film The Bank Job revolves around alleged photos of Margaret. 260 A character Pantomime Princess Margaret made regular appearances in the BBCs 1970s comedy show Monty Pythons Flying Circus . 261 Titles styles honours and arms edit Royal monogram 262 Titles and styles edit 21 August 1930 11 December 1936: Her Royal Highness Princess Margaret of York 263 11 December 1936 6 October 1961: Her Royal Highness The Princess Margaret 264 6 October 1961 9 February 2002: Her Royal Highness The Princess Margaret Countess of Snowdon Honours edit See also: List of honours of the British royal family by country Companion of the Order of the Crown of India CI 12 June 1947 265 Dame of Justice of the Order of St John of Jerusalem DJStJ 23 June 1948 266 Dame Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order GCVO 1 June 1953 267 Dame Grand Cross of the Order of St John of Jerusalem GCStJ 20 June 1956 268 Royal Victorian Chain 21 August 1990 269 Royal Family Order of George V 270 Royal Family Order of George VI 271 Royal Family Order of Elizabeth II 270 Foreign honours edit Netherlands: Grand Cross of the Order of the Netherlands Lion 1948 272 Zanzibar: Order of the Brilliant Star of Zanzibar First Class 1956 272 Belgium: Grand Cross of the Order of the Crown 1960 272 Uganda: Order of the Crown Lion and Spear of Toro Kingdom 1965 272 Japan: Order of the Precious Crown First Class 5 October 1971 272 Honorary military appointments edit Australia Colonel-in-Chief of the Womens Royal Australian Army Corps 273 Bermuda Colonel-in-Chief of the Bermuda Regiment 274 Canada Colonel-in-Chief of the Royal Highland Fusiliers of Canada Colonel-in-Chief of the Princess Louise Fusiliers Colonel-in-Chief of the Royal Newfoundland Regiment New Zealand Colonel-in-Chief of the Northland Regiment 275 United Kingdom Colonel-in-Chief of the 15th19th The Kings Royal Hussars 276 Colonel-in-Chief of the Light Dragoons 277 Colonel-in-Chief of the Royal Highland Fusiliers Princess Margarets Own Glasgow and Ayrshire Regiment Colonel-in-Chief of the Queen Alexandras Royal Army Nursing Corps 278 Colonel-in-Chief of the 1st East Anglian Regiment Royal Norfolk and Suffolk 279 Deputy Colonel-in-Chief of the Royal Anglian Regiment 280 Honorary Air Commodore Royal Air Force Coningsby 281 Awards edit Queen Elizabeth II Coronation Award 2003 282 Arms edit Coat of arms of Princess Margaret Countess of Snowdon Notes The Princesss personalized coat of arms were those of the Royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom with a label for difference. Escutcheon Quarterly 1st and 4th gules three lions passant guardant or 2nd or a lion rampant gules within a double tressure flory counterflory gules 3rd azure a harp or stringed argent Orders The Royal Victorian Order ribbon. VICTORIA Other elements The whole differenced by a label of three points Argent first and third charged with a Tudor rose the second with a thistle proper 283 Banner The princesss personal standard was that of Royal Standard of the United Kingdom labelled for difference as in her arms. in Scotland Symbolism As with the Royal Arms of the United Kingdom. The first and fourth quarters are the arms of England the second of Scotland the third of Ireland . Issue edit Name Birth Marriage Issue David Armstrong-Jones 2nd Earl of Snowdon 3 November 1961 8 October 1993 Separated 2020 Serena Stanhope Charles Armstrong-Jones Viscount Linley Lady Margarita Armstrong-Jones Lady Sarah Armstrong-Jones 1 May 1964 14 July 1994 Daniel Chatto Samuel Chatto Arthur Chatto Ancestry edit Ancestors of Princess Margaret Countess of Snowdon 284 8. Edward VII of the United Kingdom 4. George V of the United Kingdom 9. Princess Alexandra of Denmark 2. George VI of the United Kingdom 10. Francis Duke of Teck 5. Princess Victoria Mary of Teck 11. Princess Mary Adelaide of Cambridge 1. Princess Margaret Countess of Snowdon 12. Claude Bowes-Lyon 13th Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne 6. Claude Bowes-Lyon 14th Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne 13. Frances Dora Smith 3. Lady Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon 14. Charles Cavendish-Bentinck 7. Cecilia Nina Cavendish-Bentinck 15. Caroline Louisa Burnaby References edit In 2002 the Church of England changed its policy on marriages of divorced persons. Under certain circumstances it now permits a person with a former spouse still living to remarry in church. 1 Archived 25 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine 2 No. 33636 . The London Gazette . 22 August 1930. p. 5225. Heald p. 1; Warwick pp. 2728 Davies Caroline 11 February 2002. A tale of two sisters enduring affection . The Daily Telegraph . Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Princess Margaret - Growing up . CBBC . 9 February 2002. Archived from the original on 26 June 2022 . Retrieved 26 June 2022 . Henry John Forbes Simson 18721932 . BJOG: An International Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology . 39 4: 920923. December 1932. doi : 10.1111j.1471-0528.1932.tb16082.x . S2CID 221490066 . Maam darling: The princess driven by loyalty and duty . The Independent . 25 February 1998. Archived from the original on 26 June 2019 . Retrieved 10 April 2013 . Heald p. 6; Warwick p. 33 Her godparents were: the Prince of Wales her paternal uncle for whom his brother Prince George stood proxy; Princess Ingrid of Sweden her paternal cousin for whom another cousin Lady Patricia Ramsay stood proxy; Princess Victoria her paternal great-aunt; Lady Rose Leveson-Gower her maternal aunt; and the Hon David Bowes-Lyon her maternal uncle. 8 Warwick p. 31 Warwick pp. 3132 Crawford pp. 1434; Heald pp. 78; Warwick pp. 3539 Warwick pp. 34 120 Warwick pp. 4546 Quoted in Warwick p. 52 a b c d e Bradford Lisa Sheridan in From Cabbages to Kings quoted by Warwick pp. 5152 Warwick p. 52 Captain Scott and J M Barrie: an unlikely friendship . The Telegraph . Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 1 August 2019 . Heald p. 11; Warwick p. 71 Heald p. 18; Warwick p. 76 Royal Support for the Scouting and Guiding Movements Official Website of the British Monarchy archived from the original on 24 January 2009 retrieved 25 July 2008 The charitable princess BBC News 9 February 2002 archived from the original on 19 October 2022 retrieved 17 December 2008 Crawford p. 110; Warwick p. 98 Crawford pp. 104119; Warwick pp. 99101 Warwick p. 102 Biography of HM Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother: Activities as Queen Official website of the British monarchy archived from the original on 10 October 2012 retrieved 28 July 2009 Crawford pp. 137141 a b Childrens Hour: Princess Elizabeth BBC Archive 13 October 1940 archived from the original on 27 November 2019 retrieved 16 September 2022 Dempster p. 8 a b c Puente Maria 8 February 2019. Princess Margaret: PBS takes a look at the original Rebel Princess . USA Today . Archived from the original on 9 April 2023 . Retrieved 19 November 2020 . Bradford; Heald p. 9 Botham p. 9 Hardman Robert 2022. Queen of Our Times: The Life of Elizabeth II . Pegasus Books published 17 March 2022. ISBN 978-1643139098 . Aronson p. 92 How a young Princess Elizabeth celebrated VE Day unnoticed among the crowds in London . The Independent . 14 June 2020. Archived from the original on 13 November 2023 . Retrieved 8 November 2023 . A Royal Night Out: What really happened the night the Princesses left the palace for VE Day . Tatler . 30 April 2020. Archived from the original on 16 June 2023 . Retrieved 8 November 2023 . a b Helen Molesworth Property from the Collection of Her Royal Highness The Princess Margaret Countess of Snowdon . Christies Auction House Jewellery Department London 2006. Auction of the Property of HRH Princess Margaret Archived 30 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine Aronson p. 97 Heald p. 39 a b c De-la-Noy Michael 21 June 1995. Obituary: Gp Capt Peter Townsend . The Independent . Archived from the original on 1 February 2020 . Retrieved 7 November 2020 . Heald p. 53 Crawford p. 111 Crawford p. 164 Younger Princess Favorite . The Hastings Daily Tribune . 20 November 1947. p. 21. Warwick p. 140 Warwick pp. 138139 Warwick pp. 140142 a b c d e f g h i j k Botham Noel 2012. 2: In Pursuit of Romance . Margaret - The Last Real Princess . Kings Road Publishing. ISBN 978-1784187224 . Archived from the original on 23 May 2024 . Retrieved 16 December 2020 . Warwick pp. 154159 The secrets of Margarets London . www.standard.co.uk . 12 April 2012. Archived from the original on 3 February 2022 . Retrieved 3 February 2022 . Royal Betrothal Story is Denied . Barrier Miner . 5 August 1948. Archived from the original on 23 May 2024 . Retrieved 3 February 2022 . Life . Time Inc. 31 October 1949. Archived from the original on 7 April 2023 . Retrieved 5 February 2022 . Crawford Marion 1953. Princess Margaret . London: Purnell and Sons Ltd. p. 16. Royal legs seen in can-can . Mail . 16 July 1949. Archived from the original on 23 May 2024 . Retrieved 3 February 2022 . Princess Margaret has high time on Paris fling . The Burlington Free Press . 26 November 1951. p. 16. The Princess stays at the dance till 2am . Evening Standard . 11 June 1952. p. 5. In Trance After Meeting Princess . Advertiser . 22 May 1953. Archived from the original on 23 May 2024 . Retrieved 3 February 2022 . Shafer Jack 13 February 1977. Comeback of ex-vegetable man . The Sunday News . p. 25. North Rex 6 June 1954. Oh How Silly It All Was . Sunday Pictorial . p. 1. Taves Isabella 6 July 1958. Will Princess Margaret Ever Marry? . Denton Record Chronicle . p. 26. a b c Princess Top Squire Is Gay Playboy Who Flaunts Protocol . St. Petersburg Times . INS. 16 May 1955. p. 30. Archived from the original on 12 November 2021 . Retrieved 10 November 2020 . a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Davies Caroline 10 February 2002. A captivating woman... . The Daily Telegraph . UK. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 17 October 2008 . a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r Laguerre Andre 10 October 1955. Clue to a Princesss Choice . Life . pp. 135144. Archived from the original on 23 May 2024 . Retrieved 6 November 2020 . Princess Margaret And Milford-Haven Subject Of Romantic Gossipers . Newcastle Sun . 25 November 1947. Archived from the original on 23 May 2024 . Retrieved 5 June 2022 . Princess Visits Earl . Examiner . 18 November 1954. Archived from the original on 23 May 2024 . Retrieved 5 June 2022 . Heald p. 105 Schenectady Gazette . Schenectady Gazette. Archived from the original on 7 April 2023 . Retrieved 16 March 2023 . Princess Meg To Marry Commoner Named Jones . Victoria Advocate . Victoria TX. Associated Press. 27 February 1960. p. 1. Archived from the original on 26 January 2021 . Retrieved 10 May 2013 . Princess Margaret and future PM John Turner may have nearly married letters reveal . CBC News . 21 February 2015. Archived from the original on 16 June 2023 . Retrieved 22 February 2015 . a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s Barrymaine Norman 1 October 1958. The Story of Peter Townsend . The Australian Womens Weekly . p. 3. Archived from the original on 23 May 2024 . Retrieved 7 November 2020 . Billy Wallace To Marry Meg? . Star-News . Star Wire Services. 1 March 1958. p. 2. Archived from the original on 12 November 2021 . Retrieved 10 November 2020 . Heald p. 84; Warwick p. 163 a b c d GREAT BRITAIN: The Princess the Hero . Time . 20 July 1953. ISSN 0040-781X . Archived from the original on 3 January 2021 . Retrieved 11 November 2020 . Warwick p. 167 The day the King died BBC 6 February 2002 archived from the original on 30 May 2018 retrieved 29 May 2018 a b c d e f Lacey Robert 2008. 15: Mindful of the Churchs Teaching . Monarch: The Life and Reign of Elizabeth II . Simon and Schuster. pp. 187198. ISBN 978-1439108390 . Archived from the original on 23 May 2024 . Retrieved 2 December 2020 . a b c Delffs Dudley 2019. Chapter 4: Conviction and Compromise: Growing Through Private and Public Criticism . The Faith of Queen Elizabeth: The Poise Grace and Quiet Strength Behind the Crown . Zondervan. ISBN 978-0310356981 . a b c Courcy Anne de 9 January 2009. The Princess and the Photographer . Vanity Fair . Archived from the original on 19 March 2015 . Retrieved 5 November 2020 . Bryant Kenzie 29 December 2017. A New Theory About Princess Margaret and Peter Townsends Relationship Has Emerged . Vanity Fair . Archived from the original on 1 October 2022 . Retrieved 7 November 2020 . Edwards Anne 1990. Royal Sisters 1st ed.. New York: William Murrow. p. 197. ISBN 0-688-07662-9 . Bradford Sarah 28 February 2002. Elizabeth: A Biography of Her Majesty the Queen . Penguin Books Limited. ISBN 978-0-14-193333-7 . Archived from the original on 22 April 2023 . Retrieved 21 June 2022 . White Ralphe M 1969. The Royal Family: An Informal Portrait 1st ed.. New York: David McKay Inc. pp. 1578. a b c d e f Brown Craig 2018. Ninety-Nine Glimpses of Princess Margaret . Farrar Straus and Giroux. pp. 87 91 9496. ISBN 978-0374719685 . Judd Denis 2012. George VI . London: I.B. Tauris Co Ltd. p. 248. ISBN 9781780760711 . The Londoners Diary: Caravan Artist . Evening Standard . 31 July 1951. Warwick p. 170 Warwick pp. 170171 Heald p. 89; Warwick p. 180 Barber Frances 11 November 1952. Princes Margaret Is Said To Have The Look Of Love . Dayton Daily News . p. 52. Heald p. 91; Warwick p. 176 Warwick p. 182 Townsend Peter 1978. Time and Chance . London: William Collins Sons Co Ltd. p. 194. ISBN 0002118572 . WHO IS TOWNSEND? . Australian Womens Weekly . 23 March 1955 . Retrieved 25 October 2021 . Queen Was At Home To Riders At Windsor . The Tatler and Bystander : 11. 6 August 1952. Hardman Robert 17 March 2022. Queen of Our Times: The Life of Elizabeth II . Pan Macmillan. ISBN 978-1-5290-6343-1 . Archived from the original on 7 April 2023 . Retrieved 21 June 2022 . Stoneman William H 9 August 1952. Margarets Captain Quite A Hero . Miami Herald . Air Ace Wins Divorce . Truth . 21 December 1952. Archived from the original on 23 May 2024 . Retrieved 25 October 2021 . Hart-Davis Duff 2007. Kings Counsellor: The Diaries of Sir Alan Lascelles 2nd ed.. London: Phoenix. p. 410. ISBN 978-0-7538-2225-8 . Channon Henry 2022. Wednesday 18 February 1953 . In Heffer Simon ed.. Diaries 1943-57 . London: Penguin Randon House. ISBN 978-1-529-15174-9 . Princess Margaret who is pretending to be ill with gastric flu and perhaps half is has announced her intention of marrying Peter Townsend! The Queen quoted by Princess Margaret in Warwick p. 186 a b c d Princess Margaret . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 7 April 2023 . Retrieved 27 July 2014 . a b c d e Barrymaines 1958 biography dates The Times s editorial to 24 October an error which other workseven Townsends autobiographyrepeats. Edwards Anne 2017. Royal Sisters: Queen Elizabeth II and Princess Margaret . Rowman Littlefield. pp. 268269 364. ISBN 978-1630762667 . Archived from the original on 7 April 2023 . Retrieved 9 November 2020 . London Press Quiet About Royal Affair . Eugene Register-Guard . Associated Press. 23 July 1953. p. 2A. Archived from the original on 2 January 2021 . Retrieved 7 November 2020 . Warwick p. 187 a b c d Ann Sumner Holmes 13 October 2016. The Church of England and Divorce in the Twentieth Century: Legalism and Grace . Routledge. pp. 7879. ISBN 9781848936171 . Retrieved 3 January 2019 . a b c Lacey Robert 2017. The Crown: The Official Companion. Elizabeth II Winston Churchill and the making of a young queen 1947-1955 . Crown Archetype. pp. 160 270 272. ISBN 978-1524762285 . Warwick p. 191 a b c d e Paul Reynolds 19 November 2016. Did the Queen stop Princess Margaret marrying Peter Townsend? . bbc.co.uk . BBC. Archived from the original on 19 November 2016 . Retrieved 19 November 2016 . a b Vickers Hugo 17 November 2019. How accurate is The Crown? We sort fact from fiction in the royal drama . The Times . ISSN 0140-0460 . Archived from the original on 4 December 2019 . Retrieved 7 November 2020 . Warwick p. 203 Warwick p. 192 Palace Challenged To Deny Royal Romance . Sarasota Herald-Tribune . United Press. 30 May 1955. p. 8. Archived from the original on 11 February 2021 . Retrieved 7 November 2020 . a b c d e f g h i Kynaston David 2010. Family Britain 1951-1957 . Bloomsbury Press. pp. 519528. ISBN 978-0-8027-1964-5 . a b c Uproar Over Romance Is Discussed . Ocala Star-Banner . Associated Press. 18 October 1955. p. 1. Archived from the original on 28 March 2023 . Retrieved 7 November 2020 . Murison Krissi 2 November 2019. Helena Bonham Carter interview: talking toyboys and tiaras with The Crowns Princess Margaret . The Times . ISSN 0140-0460 . Archived from the original on 18 September 2022 . Retrieved 8 November 2020 . a b England Excitedly Awaits Confirmation of Its Hopes . The Free Lance-Star . Associated Press. 14 October 1955. p. 1. Archived from the original on 31 August 2022 . Retrieved 7 November 2020 . a b Dates in Doubt: Britons Are Convinced Theyll Wed . The Free Lance-Star . Associated Press. 15 October 1955. p. 1. Archived from the original on 22 February 2023 . Retrieved 8 November 2020 . a b c Meg Gives Up Townsend As Love Submits to Duty . Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . Associated Press. 1 November 1955. pp. 12. Archived from the original on 11 February 2021 . Retrieved 8 November 2020 . a b c d e Lyall Sarah 21 June 1995. Peter Townsend Dies at 80; Princess Margarets Love Published 1995 . The New York Times . p. A16. ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on 7 April 2023 . Retrieved 5 November 2020 . a b Nikkhah Roya 7 November 2009. Princess Margaret: recently unearthed letter sheds new light on decision not to marry . The Telegraph . Archived from the original on 27 November 2020 . Retrieved 20 May 2023 . Theo Aronson 1997. Princess Margaret . Regnery Pub. ISBN 978-0-89526-409-1 . Dempster Nigel 1981. H.R.H. the Princess Margaret a life unfulfilled . London; New York : Quartet Books. ISBN 978-0-7043-2314-8 . Shawcross William 2 October 2009. Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother: The Official Biography . Pan Macmillan. ISBN 978-0-230-74810-1 . Archived from the original on 22 April 2023 . Retrieved 21 June 2022 . Princess Margaret 31 October 1955 quoted in Warwick p. 205 Marr Andrew 2012. The Real Elizabeth: An Intimate Portrait of Queen Elizabeth II . Henry Holt and Company. ISBN 978-1429950022 . Townsends Hurt of Rejection Healed . Desert Sun . UPI. 4 September 1970. p. 8. Archived from the original on 27 November 2020 . Retrieved 7 November 2020 . Heald Tim 2007. Princess Margaret : a life unravelled . Internet Archive. London : Weidenfeld Nicolson. ISBN 978-0-297-84820-2 . Dempster Nigel 1981. H.R.H. the Princess Margaret a life unfulfilled . Internet Archive. London; New York : Quartet Books. ISBN 978-0-7043-2314-8 . Rocco Fiammetta 3 October 1993. When Princess Margaret... . The Independent . Aronson Theo 1997. Princess Margaret . London: Regency Inc. p. 308. ISBN 9780895264091 . The Australian Womens Weekly 1933 - 1982 - 5 Oct 1977 - p13 . Trove . Archived from the original on 9 April 2023 . Retrieved 5 June 2022 . a b c d e 1960: Margaret weds Armstrong-Jones . BBC . Archived from the original on 7 March 2008 . Retrieved 14 May 2018 . Princess Margarets wedding . BBC . Archived from the original on 4 May 2018 . Retrieved 14 May 2018 . A Close Look at the British Royal Familys Engagement Rings slide 4 . Vogue . Archived from the original on 19 August 2020 . Retrieved 15 May 2018 . Bonner Mehera 25 October 2017. The Most Gorgeous Royal Engagement Rings: Your Official Guide to Who Owns What . Marie Claire UK . Archived from the original on 10 April 2023 . Retrieved 15 May 2018 . Heald p. 112: looked strikingly like Princess Margaret ; Warwick p. 223: more than a passing resemblance to the Princess Heald pp. 114115; Warwick p. 225 Princess Margaret daughter of George VI . Westminster Abbey . Archived from the original on 15 May 2018 . Retrieved 14 May 2018 . Warwick p. 227 Heald pp. 119121; Warwick pp. 229230 Heald p. 122; Warwick p. 271 Heald p. 141; Warwick p. 233 Heald pp. 140141 Haden-Guest Anthony 1965. The New Class . The Queen . Warwick p. 239 Lord Snowdon: small in stature big in bed . www.telegraph.co.uk . 20 June 2008. Archived from the original on 29 July 2023 . Retrieved 24 September 2022 . Heald p. 170; Warwick p. 245 Heald p. 170 Warwick pp. 245246 Aronson p. 229 Cricinfo Players and Officials Keith Miller Cricinfo archived from the original on 2 December 2008 retrieved 13 October 2008 Breese Charlotte 2012. Chapter Twelve: The Sweet Smell 19561959 . Hutch . London: Bloomsbury. ISBN 978-1-4088-3113-7 . Archived from the original on 23 May 2024 . Retrieved 2 March 2020 . Munn Michael 24 May 2009. Oh God I wanted her to die Archived 6 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine The Sunday Times Retrieved 29 May 2009. Playgirl Volume 3 1975 Aronson p. 260 Bradford Sarah 1996. Elizabeth: A Biography of Britains Queen . London. cite book : CS1 maint: location missing publisher link Heald p. 194; Warwick p. 255 Margaret quoted in Warwick p. 256 Heald p. 198; Warwick p. 257 Quoted in Warwick p. 257 Warwick p. 257 Warwick p. 258 Heald p. 197; Warwick p. 258 a b 1976: Princess Margaret and Lord Snowdon to split . BBC. 19 March 1976. Archived from the original on 7 March 2008 . Retrieved 14 May 2018 . Dennis Canavan quoted in Warwick p. 260 Willie Hamilton quoted in Warwick p. 261 Pimlott Ben 1996. The Princess and the Press: The Fate of Margaret . PBS. Archived from the original on 7 April 2023 . Retrieved 16 March 2018 . Aronson p. 268 a b Nolasco Stephanie 29 June 2021. Princess Margaret was a deeply Christian woman who desperately wanted her doomed marriage to work: author . Fox News . Archived from the original on 16 June 2023 . Retrieved 8 November 2023 . Warwick p. 263 Warwick p. 274 Heald p. 308; Warwick p. 256 Princess Margaret and Northern Ireland . BBC. 9 February 2002. Archived from the original on 19 October 2022 . Retrieved 19 March 2018 . Payne p. 17 Heald pp. 149150 Heald pp. 206207 Heald p. 207 Heald pp. 154163 210 Heald p. 187 Heald pp. 188190 Heald pp. 225226 Heald pp. 229233 Heald pp. 245247 1979: IRA bomb kills Lord Mountbatten Archived 21 January 2008 at the Wayback Machine BBC On This Day 27 August 1979 a b Warwick p. 267 Heald p. 217; Warwick p. 267 Apple R.W. Jr. 1981. British Uneasy Over Irish Cancel Visit To U.S. By Princess Margaret . The New York Times . Archived from the original on 23 August 2023 . Retrieved 16 March 2018 . Warwick pp. 267268 a b c d e The charitable princess . BBC. 9 February 2002. Archived from the original on 26 September 2023 . Retrieved 19 March 2018 . a b c Scots sorrow at death of princess . BBC. 9 February 2002. Archived from the original on 19 October 2022 . Retrieved 27 May 2018 . Northern ballet theatre . Archived from the original on 25 May 2013 . Retrieved 10 April 2013 . Tributes pour in from across England . BBC. 9 February 2002. Archived from the original on 16 March 2023 . Retrieved 27 May 2018 . a b Welsh tributes flow for princess . BBC. 9 February 2002. Archived from the original on 19 October 2022 . Retrieved 27 May 2018 . a b c d e Margaret: Devotee of the Arts . 9 February 2002. Archived from the original on 19 April 2021 . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . a b c Princesss history of ill health . BBC. 9 February 2002. Archived from the original on 1 January 2021 . Retrieved 18 March 2018 . Heald pp. 3233 a b c Archer Peter 9 February 2002. Smoking and heady lifestyle took its toll . The Independent . Archived from the original on 17 March 2024 . Retrieved 17 March 2024 . Her addiction to strong Chesterfield cigarettes was rivalled only by her partiality to Famous Grouse whisky at home and gin in hot climates. Bates Stephen 29 March 2001. Princess Margaret resting after stroke . The Guardian . Retrieved 12 March 2021 . Princess Margaret - Her failing health . CBBC . 9 February 2002. Archived from the original on 26 June 2022 . Retrieved 26 June 2022 . Warwick p. 276 a b Heald p. 256 A lifetime dogged by ill-health . The Guardian . 9 February 2002. Archived from the original on 16 June 2022 . Retrieved 18 March 2018 . Warwick pp. 290291 Princess Margaret: The medical care . BBC. 11 January 2001. Archived from the original on 2 January 2021 . Retrieved 16 March 2018 . Charles visits Princess Margaret . BBC. 15 January 2001. Archived from the original on 11 February 2021 . Retrieved 16 March 2018 . Warwick pp. 299302 Warwick p. 303 Warwick p. 304 Heir to the throne on death of his aunt . AP Archive . YouTube. 24 July 2015. Archived from the original on 11 December 2021 . Retrieved 27 May 2018 . Charles: My darling aunt . BBC. 9 February 2002. Archived from the original on 16 March 2023 . Retrieved 27 May 2018 . Blairs condolences for Royal Family . BBC . 10 February 2002. Archived from the original on 19 April 2021 . Retrieved 18 April 2021 . World tributes to Princess Margaret . BBC . 9 February 2002. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021 . Retrieved 18 April 2021 . Prayers for Princess Margaret . BBC . 10 February 2002. Archived from the original on 18 April 2021 . Retrieved 18 April 2021 . Princess to be cremated . BBC. 12 February 2002. Archived from the original on 10 December 2020 . Retrieved 19 March 2018 . a b A break in Royal tradition . BBC. 15 February 2002. Archived from the original on 22 April 2021 . Retrieved 19 March 2018 . Warwick p. 306 Davies Caroline 16 February 2002. Bell tolls for Margarets final journey . The Daily Telegraph . Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 19 March 2018 . Margaret to be cremated because burial too gloomy . The Scotsman . 13 February 2002. Archived from the original on 21 April 2024 . Retrieved 21 April 2024 . Warwick pp. 306308 Margarets ashes to be interred with Queen Mothers coffin . Irish Examiner . 31 March 2002. Archived from the original on 15 September 2022 . Retrieved 15 September 2022 . Heald p. 295 Tributes to Queen Mother and Princess Margaret at Windsor memorial . BBC . 30 March 2012. Archived from the original on 30 March 2022 . Retrieved 30 March 2022 . Heald p. 294 Heald pp. 130131 222223 Heald p. 89 Heald pp. 1516 89 Heald p. 146 Crawford p. 226 Vidal Gore 2006. Point to Point Navigation . London: Little Brown. ISBN 0-316-02727-8 . HRH Princess Margaret . BBC Radio 4 . 23 January 1981. Archived from the original on 10 December 2023 . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . Princess Margaret makes a guest appearance on The Archers . BBC . 22 June 1984. Archived from the original on 22 June 2021 . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . See for example Roy Strong quoted in Heald p. 191 Gonzales Erica 7 December 2019. The Truth About Princess Margarets Overdose Scene in The Crown . Harpers Bazaar . Archived from the original on 10 April 2023 . Retrieved 2 December 2020 . Princess Margaret Considered Converting to Catholicism Thanks to Her Friend Derek Jennings . Yahoo News . 25 November 2020. Archived from the original on 20 March 2024 . Retrieved 20 March 2024 . a b Princess Margaret: Tributes at a glance . BBC. 9 February 2002 . Retrieved 28 May 2018 . Margarets cousin attacks cruel media . BBC. 10 February 2002. Archived from the original on 28 May 2018 . Retrieved 28 May 2018 . Warwick pp. 308309 a b Algoo Jennifer 8 November 2019. Princess Margarets Greatest Fashion Moments Through the Years . Harpers Bazaar . Retrieved 28 October 2021 . Newis Smith Josh 12 September 2014. Princess Margaret: We Take A Look At The Forgotten Royal Style Icons Wardrobe . Grazia Daily . Archived from the original on 28 October 2021 . Retrieved 28 October 2021 . a b Tromans Chelsea 29 December 2019. Princess Margarets Greatest Fashion Moments Through the Years . Marie Claire . Archived from the original on 28 October 2021 . Retrieved 28 October 2021 . a b Wong Brittany 17 November 2019. Princess Margarets Style Evolution From Peak Princess To Style Icon . HuffPost . Archived from the original on 28 October 2021 . Retrieved 28 October 2021 . a b c d Goldstone Penny 20 April 2020. A look back at Princess Margarets most daring looks . Marie Claire UK . Archived from the original on 28 October 2021 . Retrieved 28 October 2021 . Katz Brigit. Princess Margarets Iconic 21st Birthday Dress Goes on Display . Smithsonian Magazine . Archived from the original on 28 October 2021 . Retrieved 28 October 2021 . Hills Megan C. February 2019. The Christian Dior exhibition in London: The story behind Princess Margarets iconic gown and more . The Standard . Archived from the original on 28 October 2021 . Retrieved 28 October 2021 . Frost Karie 30 January 2019. Princess Margarets iconic 21st birthday gown goes on display at the VAs Dior exhibition . Harpers Bazaar . Archived from the original on 31 December 2019 . Retrieved 28 October 2021 . McDermott Kerry 17 November 2019. Princess Margarets Royal Style In 21 Divine Vintage Photos . British Vogue . Archived from the original on 28 October 2021 . Retrieved 28 October 2021 . Heald pp. 296297 a b c d e Pook Sally 26 June 2002. Margaret leaves 7.6m fortune to her children . The Daily Telegraph . Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 2 June 2018 . Nikkhah Roya 14 January 2007. Viscount Linley defends royal auction . The Daily Telegraph . Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 2 June 2018 . Heald pp. 297301 Alderson Andrew 11 June 2016. Queen urges Margarets heirs to avoid another royal gift scandal . The Daily Telegraph . Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 2 June 2018 . Princesss gems tiara for auction . CNN. 9 June 2006. Archived from the original on 18 March 2019 . Retrieved 2 June 2018 . a b Heald p. 301 Royal auction raises over 13.5m . BBC. 15 June 2006. Archived from the original on 18 March 2019 . Retrieved 2 June 2018 . Five actresses to play the Queen for C4 . The Guardian . 27 January 2009. Archived from the original on 25 January 2016 . Retrieved 4 March 2009 . The Crown: all you need to know about Netflixs 100 million series from the shocking first scene to Matt Smiths topless rowing . The Daily Telegraph . 14 October 2016. Archived from the original on 10 January 2022. Moore Matthew 14 December 2019. The Crown sees Wikipedia surge on British history searches . The Times . Archived from the original on 14 December 2019 . Retrieved 16 December 2019 . Dominick Nora 18 December 2023. The Crown Featured The Best Casting For A Young Claire Foy And Vanessa Kirby For The Final Season . BuzzFeed . Archived from the original on 19 December 2023 . Retrieved 19 December 2023 . Thorpe Vanessa 9 February 2008. Anger at royal slur in bank robbery film . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 23 May 2024 . Retrieved 19 April 2021 . Cogan Brian; Massey Jeff 2014. Everything I Ever Needed to Know About I Learned from Monty Python History Art Poetry Communism Philosophy the Media Birth Death Religion Literature Latin Transvestites Botany the French Class Systems Mythology Fish Slapping and Many More! . St. Martins Press. p. 102. ISBN 978-1466842168 . Archived from the original on 23 May 2024 . Retrieved 19 March 2023 . Bowcott Owen 30 December 2016. Your humble and devoted servant: letters between Thatcher and Princess Margaret released . The Guardian . Archived from the original on 9 February 2023 . Retrieved 9 February 2023 . The Heart of The Empire 6th May 1935 . Royal Collection Trust . Archived from the original on 24 August 2023 . Retrieved 24 August 2023 . King George V and Queen Mary stand before the altar rails of St Pauls Cathedral; members of the Royal Family including the Duke and Duchess of York later King George VI and Queen Elizabeth and the Princesses Elizabeth and Margaret of York are standing behind. Princess Margaret at no time assumed the title Princess Margaret Mrs Antony Armstrong-Jones see e.g. issues of the London Gazette 1 November 1960 25 November 1960 24 February 1961 28 February 1961 3 March 1961 and 24 March 1961. No. 37976 . The London Gazette Supplement. 6 June 1947. p. 2569. No. 38339 . The London Gazette . 29 June 1948. p. 3787. No. 39863 . The London Gazette Supplement. 26 May 1953. p. 2940. No. 40818 . The London Gazette . 29 June 1956. p. 3803. No. 52253 . The London Gazette . 24 August 1990. p. 13769. a b Vickers Hugo 1994 Royal Orders Boxtree p. 147 ISBN 9781852835101 Royal Family Orders . Official website of the British monarchy . Royal Household. Archived from the original on 7 March 2013 . Retrieved 13 April 2016 . a b c d e Goodey Emma 21 December 2015. Princess Margaret . The Royal Family . Archived from the original on 7 May 2016 . Retrieved 16 December 2020 . No. 39865 . The London Gazette Supplement. 26 May 1953. p. 2997. No. 49902 . The London Gazette . 19 October 1984. p. 14141. No. 15 PDF . New Zealand Gazette . 3 March 1955. p. 332. Archived PDF from the original on 9 October 2022. No. 41535 . The London Gazette Supplement. 28 October 1958. p. 6639. No. 54745 . The London Gazette Supplement. 21 April 1997. p. 4766. No. 40286 . The London Gazette Supplement. 24 September 1954. p. 5499. No. 41801 . The London Gazette Supplement. 25 August 1959. p. 5421. No. 43422 . The London Gazette Supplement. 28 August 1964. p. 7419. No. 47234 . The London Gazette Supplement. 10 June 1977. p. 7079. QEII Award recipients - updated Aug 2016 PDF . Royal Academy of Dance. Archived from the original PDF on 8 August 2017 . Retrieved 8 August 2017 . Marks of cadency in the British royal family Heraldica.org archived from the original on 17 March 2018 retrieved 17 October 2008 Louda Jiri; Maclagan Michael 1999 1981. Lines of Succession: Heraldry of the Royal Families of Europe 2nd ed.. London: Little Brown. p. 34. ISBN 978-0-316-84820-6 . Bibliography edit Aronson Theo 2001 Princess Margaret: A Biography London: Michael OMara Books Limited ISBN 1-85479-682-8 Botham Noel 2002 Margaret: The Last Real Princess London: Blake Publishing Ltd ISBN 1-903402-64-6 Bradford Sarah ; Harrison B.; Goldman L. January 2006. Margaret Rose Princess countess of Snowdon 19302002 . Oxford Dictionary of National Biography revised October 2008 ed.. Oxford University Press. doi : 10.1093ref:odnb76713 . Retrieved 7 December 2008 . Subscription or UK public library membership required. Crawford Marion 1950 The Little Princesses London: Cassell and Co Heald Tim 2007 Princess Margaret: A Life Unravelled London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson ISBN 978-0-297-84820-2 Warwick Christopher 2002 Princess Margaret: A Life of Contrasts London: Carlton Publishing Group ISBN 0-233-05106-6 External links edit Wikiquote has quotations related to Princess Margaret Countess of Snowdon . Wikimedia Commons has media related to Princess Margaret Countess of Snowdon . Profile on the official site of the British Monarchy HRH Princess Margaret 19302002 at BBC News Death of Princess Margaret British Columbia Archives: video of Princess Margaret at a reception HMS Hood Discovery 1958 3 Newspaper clippings about Princess Margaret Countess of Snowdon in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW Portraits of Princess Margaret Countess of Snowdon at the National Portrait Gallery London Princess Margaret Countess of Snowdon House of Windsor Born: 21 August 1930 Died: 9 February 2002 Academic offices Preceded by The Earl of Harrowby President of the University College of North Staffordshire 19561962 College becomes Keele University New title Chancellor of Keele University 19621986 Succeeded by The Lord Moser v t e Princess Margaret Countess of Snowdon 21 August 1930 9 February 2002 1930-08-21 2002-02-09 Titles 19601978 Countess of Snowdon Viscountess Linley Family Antony Armstrong-Jones 1st Earl of Snowdon former husband wedding David Armstrong-Jones 2nd Earl of Snowdon son Lady Sarah Chatto daughter George VI father Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon mother Elizabeth II sister Fashion Wedding dress Cream Dior dress Poltimore Tiara Memorials LMS Princess Royal Class 6203 Princess Margaret Rose Princess Margaret Cancer Centre Princess Margaret Hospital Christchurch Princess Margaret Hospital Funafuti Princess Margaret Hospital Hong Kong Princess Margaret Hospital for Children Princess Margaret Mountain Princess Margaret Road Princess Margaret Rose gladiolus Princess Margaret Rose Cave Princess Margaret School Princess Margaret Secondary School Penticton Princess Margaret Secondary School Surrey Popular culture Conversation Piece at the Royal Lodge Windsor 1950 Spitting Image 19841996 Willi und die Windzors 1996 The Queens Sister 2005 The Queen 2009 A Royal Night Out 2015 The Crown 20162023 Maam Darling 2017 v t e British princesses The generations indicate descent from George I who formalised the use of the titles prince and princess for members of the British royal family. Where a princess may have been or is descended from George I more than once her most senior descent by which she bore or bears her title is used. 1st generation Sophia Dorothea Queen in Prussia 2nd generation Anne Princess Royal and Princess of Orange Princess Amelia Princess Caroline Mary Landgravine of Hesse-Kassel Louise Queen of Denmark and Norway 3rd generation Augusta Duchess of Brunswick Princess Elizabeth Princess Louisa Caroline Matilda Queen of Denmark and Norway 4th generation Charlotte Princess Royal and Queen of Wurttemberg Princess Augusta Sophia Elizabeth Landgravine of Hesse-Homburg Princess Mary Duchess of Gloucester and Edinburgh Princess Sophia Princess Amelia Princess Sophia of Gloucester Princess Caroline of Gloucester 5th generation Charlotte Princess Leopold of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld Princess Elizabeth of Clarence Queen Victoria Augusta Grand Duchess of Mecklenburg-Strelitz Princess Mary Adelaide Duchess of Teck 6th generation Victoria Princess Royal and German Empress Alice Grand Duchess of Hesse and by Rhine Helena Princess Christian of Schleswig-Holstein Princess Louise Duchess of Argyll Beatrice Princess Henry of Battenberg Princess Frederica Baroness von Pawel-Rammingen Princess Marie of Hanover 7th generation Louise Princess Royal and Duchess of Fife Princess Victoria Maud Queen of Norway Marie Queen of Romania Grand Duchess Victoria Feodorovna of Russia Alexandra Princess of Hohenlohe-Langenburg Princess Beatrice Duchess of Galliera Margaret Crown Princess of Sweden Lady Patricia Ramsay Princess Alice Countess of Athlone Marie Louise Princess Maximilian of Baden Alexandra Grand Duchess of Mecklenburg-Schwerin Princess Olga of Hanover 8th generation Mary Princess Royal and Countess of Harewood Alexandra Princess Arthur of Connaught and Duchess of Fife Maud Carnegie Countess of Southesk Princess Sibylla Duchess of Vasterbotten Princess Caroline Mathilde of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha Frederica Queen of Greece 9th generation Queen Elizabeth II Princess Margaret Countess of Snowdon Princess Alexandra The Honourable Lady Ogilvy 10th generation Anne Princess Royal 11th generation Princess Beatrice Mrs Edoardo Mapelli Mozzi Princess Eugenie Mrs Jack Brooksbank Lady Louise Mountbatten-Windsor 12th generation Princess Charlotte of Wales Princess Lilibet of Sussex Princesses whose titles were removed and eligible people who do not use the title are shown in italics . v t e House of Windsor Generations are numbered by their descent from George V and Mary of Teck 1st generation Edward VIII George VI Mary Princess Royal and Countess of Harewood Prince Henry Duke of Gloucester Prince George Duke of Kent Prince John 2nd generation Elizabeth II Princess Margaret Countess of Snowdon Prince Edward Duke of Kent Princess Alexandra The Honourable Lady Ogilvy Prince William of Gloucester Prince Michael of Kent Prince Richard Duke of Gloucester 3rd generation Charles III Anne Princess Royal Prince Andrew Duke of York George Windsor Earl of St Andrews Prince Edward Duke of Edinburgh Lady Helen Taylor Lord Nicholas Windsor Alexander Windsor Earl of Ulster Lady Davina Windsor Lord Frederick Windsor Lady Rose Gilman Lady Gabriella Kingston 4th generation William Prince of Wales Prince Harry Duke of Sussex Princess Beatrice Edward Windsor Lord Downpatrick Princess Eugenie Lady Marina Windsor Lady Amelia Windsor Lady Louise Windsor Xan Windsor Lord Culloden Albert Windsor James Earl of Wessex Leopold Windsor Lady Cosima Windsor Maud Windsor Louis Windsor Isabella Windsor 5th generation Prince George of Wales Princess Charlotte of Wales Prince Louis of Wales Prince Archie of Sussex Princess Lilibet of Sussex Descendant of Elizabeth II and therefor a member of the house of Mountbatten-Windsor yet officially considered members of the house of Windsor Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Latvia Poland Israel Catalonia Artists MusicBrainz People Trove Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef NARA SNAC Te Papa New Zealand Retrieved from https:en.wikipedia.orgwindex.php?titlePrincessMargaret CountessofSnowdonoldid1249782365 Categories : 1930 births 2002 deaths Nobility from Angus Scotland 20th-century British people 20th-century British women 21st-century British people 21st-century British women Anglo-Scots Armstrong-Jones family British Anglicans British countesses British princesses Burials at St Georges Chapel Windsor Castle Chancellors of Keele University Companions of the Order of the Crown of India Daughters of kings Daughters of emperors Dames Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order Dames Grand Cross of the Order of St John Girlguiding officials Grand Crosses of the Order of the Crown Belgium Grand Cordons of the Order of the Precious Crown Honorary air commodores House of Windsor Jewellery collectors Recipients of the Silver Fish Award Wheelchair users Princess Margaret Countess of Snowdon Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: location missing publisher Pages containing London Gazette template with parameter supp set to y Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2023 EngvarB from October 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 October 2024 at 20:10 UTC . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view