Steve Jobs - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Donate Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 1 Early life Toggle Early life subsection 1.1 Family 1.2 Infancy 1.3 Childhood 1.4 Homestead High 1.5 Reed College 2 19741985 Toggle 19741985 subsection 2.1 Pre-Apple 2.2 Apple 19761985 3 19851997 Toggle 19851997 subsection 3.1 NeXT computer 3.2 Pixar and Disney 4 19972011 Toggle 19972011 subsection 4.1 Return to Apple 5 Health problems Toggle Health problems subsection 5.1 Resignation 5.2 Death 6 Innovations and designs Toggle Innovations and designs subsection 6.1 Apple I 6.2 Apple II 6.3 Lisa 6.4 Macintosh 6.5 NeXT Computer 6.6 iMac 6.7 iTunes 6.8 iPod 6.9 iPhone 6.10 iPad 7 Personal life Toggle Personal life subsection 7.1 Marriage 7.2 Family 7.3 Philanthropy 8 Honors and awards 9 In popular culture 10 See also 11 References Toggle References subsection 11.1 Bibliography 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Steve Jobs 166 languages Aceh Afrikaans Alemannisch nglisc Aragones Arpetan Asturianu Avanee Azrbaycanca Basa Bali Ban-lam-gu Basa Banyumasan Bikol Central Bislama Bosanski Brezhoneg Catala Cestina Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Davvisamegiella Deitsch Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Espanol Esperanto Estremenu Euskara Fiji Hindi Francais Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gaidhlig Galego Goychi Konknni Hak-ka-ngi Hausa Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Islenska Italiano Jawa Kapampangan Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyol ayisyen Kurdi Ladino Latina Latviesu Letzebuergesch Lietuviu Limburgs Lingala Lombard Magyar Malagasy Malti Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmal Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Ozbekcha Pangasinan Papiamentu Plattduutsch Polski Portugues Qaraqalpaqsha Romana Runa Simi Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovencina Slovenscina Slunski srpski Srpskohrvatski Suomi Svenska Tagalog tatarca Turkce Turkmence Uyghurche Veneto Tieng Viet Volapuk Voro Winaray Yoruba Zazaki Zemaiteska Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia American businessman and inventor 19552011 For other uses see Steve Jobs disambiguation . Steve Jobs Jobs introducing the iPhone 4 in 2010 Born Steven Paul Jobs 1 1955-02-24 February 24 1955 San Francisco California U.S. Died October 5 2011 2011-10-05 aged 56 Palo Alto California U.S. Resting place Alta Mesa Memorial Park Education Reed College attended Years active 19712011 Known for Pioneer of the personal computer revolution with Steve Wozniak Co-creator of the Apple II Macintosh iPod iPhone iPad and first Apple Stores Title Co-founder chairman and CEO of Apple Inc. Primary investor and chairman of Pixar Founder chairman and CEO of NeXT Board member of The Walt Disney Company 2 Apple Inc. Spouse Laurene Powell m. 1991 Partner Chrisann Brennan 19721977 Children 4 including Lisa Reed and Eve Relatives Mona Simpson sister Bassma Al Jandaly cousin Malek Jandali cousin Awards Presidential Medal of Freedom posthumous 2022 Signature Steven Paul Jobs February 24 1955 October 5 2011 was an American businessman inventor and investor best known for co-founding the technology company Apple Inc. Jobs was also the founder of NeXT and chairman and majority shareholder of Pixar . He was a pioneer of the personal computer revolution of the 1970s and 1980s along with his early business partner and fellow Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak . Jobs was born in San Francisco in 1955 and adopted shortly afterwards. He attended Reed College in 1972 before withdrawing that same year. In 1974 he traveled through India seeking enlightenment before later studying Zen Buddhism . He and Wozniak co-founded Apple in 1976 to further develop and sell Wozniaks Apple I personal computer. Together the duo gained fame and wealth a year later with production and sale of the Apple II one of the first highly successful mass-produced microcomputers . Jobs saw the commercial potential of the Xerox Alto in 1979 which was mouse -driven and had a graphical user interface GUI. This led to the development of the unsuccessful Apple Lisa in 1983 followed by the breakthrough Macintosh in 1984 the first mass-produced computer with a GUI. The Macintosh launched the desktop publishing industry in 1985 for example the Aldus Pagemaker with the addition of the Apple LaserWriter the first laser printer to feature vector graphics and PostScript . In 1985 Jobs departed Apple after a long power struggle with the companys board and its then-CEO John Sculley . That same year Jobs took some Apple employees with him to found NeXT a computer platform development company that specialized in computers for higher-education and business markets serving as its CEO. In 1986 he helped develop the visual effects industry by funding the computer graphics division of Lucasfilm that eventually spun off independently as Pixar which produced the first 3D computer-animated feature film Toy Story 1995 and became a leading animation studio producing 28 films since. In 1997 Jobs returned to Apple as CEO after the companys acquisition of NeXT. He was largely responsible for reviving Apple which was on the verge of bankruptcy. He worked closely with British designer Jony Ive to develop a line of products and services that had larger cultural ramifications beginning with the Think different advertising campaign and leading to the iMac iTunes Mac OS X Apple Store iPod iTunes Store iPhone App Store and iPad . Jobs was also a board member at Gap Inc. from 1999 to 2002. 3 In 2003 Jobs was diagnosed with a pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor . He died of tumor-related respiratory arrest in 2011; in 2022 he was posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom . Since his death he has won 141 patents; Jobs holds over 450 patents in total. 4 Early life Family Steven Paul Jobs was born in San Francisco California on February 24 1955 to Joanne Carole Schieble and Abdulfattah John Jandali Arabic : . Abdulfattah Jandali was born in a Muslim household to wealthy Syrian parents the youngest of nine siblings. After obtaining his undergraduate degree at the American University of Beirut Jandali pursued a PhD in political science at the University of Wisconsin . There he met Joanne Schieble an American Catholic of Swiss-German descent whose parents owned a mink farm and real estate in Green Bay . The two fell in love but faced opposition from Schiebles father due to Jandalis Muslim faith. When Schieble became pregnant she arranged for a closed adoption and travelled to San Francisco to give birth. 5 Schieble requested that her son be adopted by college graduates. A lawyer and his wife were selected but they withdrew after discovering that the baby was a boy so Jobs was instead adopted by Paul Reinhold and Clara nee Hagopian Jobs. Paul Jobs an American of German descent was the son of a dairy farmer from Washington County Wisconsin . After dropping out of high school he worked as a mechanic then joined the US Coast Guard . When his ship was decommissioned at San Francisco he bet he could find a wife within two weeks. He then met Clara Hagopian an American of Armenian descent and the two were engaged ten days later in March 1946 and married that same year. The couple moved to Wisconsin then Indiana where Paul Jobs worked as a machinist and later as a car salesman. Since Clara missed San Francisco she convinced Paul to move back. There Paul worked as a repossession agent and Clara became a bookkeeper . In 1955 after having an ectopic pregnancy the couple looked to adopt a child. 5 Since they lacked a college education Schieble initially refused to sign the adoption papers and went to court to request that her son be removed from the Jobs household and placed with a different family but changed her mind after Paul and Clara promised to pay for their sons college tuition. 5 6 Infancy In his youth Jobss parents took him to a Lutheran church. 7 When Steve was in high school Clara admitted to his girlfriend Chrisann Brennan that she was too frightened to love Steve for the first six months of his life ... I was scared they were going to take him away from me. Even after we won the case Steve was so difficult a child that by the time he was two I felt we had made a mistake. I wanted to return him. When Chrisann shared this comment with Steve he stated that he was already aware 8 and later said that he had been deeply loved and indulged by Paul and Clara. Jobs would bristle when Paul and Clara were referred to as his adoptive parents and he regarded them as his parents 1 000 . Jobs referred to his biological parents as my sperm and egg bank. Thats not harsh its just the way it was a sperm bank thing nothing more. 9 Childhood I always thought of myself as a humanities person as a kid but I liked electronics... then I read something that one of my heroes Edwin Land of Polaroid said about the importance of people who could stand at the intersection of humanities and sciences and I decided thats what I wanted to do. Steve Jobs 10 Paul Jobs worked in several jobs that included a try as a machinist 11 several other jobs 12 and then back to work as a machinist . Paul and Clara adopted Jobss sister Patricia in 1957 13 and by 1959 the family had moved to the Monta Loma neighborhood in Mountain View California . 14 Paul built a workbench in his garage for his son in order to pass along his love of mechanics . Jobs meanwhile admired his fathers craftsmanship because he knew how to build anything. If we needed a cabinet he would build it. When he built our fence he gave me a hammer so I could work with him ... I wasnt that into fixing cars ... but I was eager to hang out with my dad. 15 The childhood family home of Steve Jobs on Crist Drive in Los Altos California is the original site of Apple Computer . The home was added to a list of historic Los Altos sites in 2013. 16 Jobs had difficulty functioning in a traditional classroom tended to resist authority figures frequently misbehaved and was suspended a few times. He frequently played pranks on others at Monta Loma Elementary School in Mountain View. His father Paul who was abused as a child never reprimanded him however and instead blamed the school for not challenging his brilliant son. 17 Jobs skipped the 5th grade and transferred to the 6th grade at Crittenden Middle School in Mountain View where he became a socially awkward loner . 18 Jobs was often bullied at Crittenden Middle and in the middle of 7th grade he gave his parents an ultimatum: either they would take him out of Crittenden or he would drop out of school. 19 The Jobs family was not affluent and only by expending all their savings were they able to buy a new home in 1967 allowing Steve to change schools. The new house a three-bedroom home on Crist Drive in Los Altos California was in the better Cupertino School District in Cupertino California . 20 The house was declared a historic site in 2013 as the first site of Apple Computer. 16 As of 2013 update it was owned by Jobss sister Patty and occupied by his stepmother Marilyn. 21 When he was 13 in 1968 22 Jobs was given a summer job by Bill Hewlett of Hewlett-Packard after Jobs cold-called him to ask for parts for an electronics project. 23 Homestead High Jobss Homestead High School yearbook photo 1972 The location of the Los Altos home meant that Jobs would be able to attend nearby Homestead High School which had strong ties to Silicon Valley . 10 He began his first year there in late 1968 along with Bill Fernandez 24 who introduced Jobs to Steve Wozniak and would become Apples first employee. Neither Jobs nor Fernandez whose father was a lawyer came from engineering households and thus decided to enroll in John McCollums Electronics I class. 24 Jobs had grown his hair long and become involved in the growing counterculture and the rebellious youth eventually clashed with McCollum and lost interest in the class. 24 Jobs underwent a change during mid-1970. He later noted to his official biographer that I started to listen to music a whole lot and I started to read more outside of just science and technology Shakespeare Plato . I loved King Lear ... when I was a senior I had this phenomenal AP English class . The teacher was this guy who looked like Ernest Hemingway . He took a bunch of us snowshoeing in Yosemite. During his last two years at Homestead High Jobs developed two different interests: electronics and literature. 25 These dual interests were particularly reflected during Jobss senior year as his best friends were Wozniak and his first girlfriend the artistic Homestead junior Chrisann Brennan . 26 In 1971 after Wozniak began attending University of California Berkeley Jobs would visit him there a few times a week. This experience led him to study in nearby Stanford University s student union. Instead of joining the electronics club Jobs put on light shows with a friend for Homesteads avant-garde jazz program. He was described by a Homestead classmate as kind of brain and kind of hippie ... but he never fit into either group. He was smart enough to be a nerd but wasnt nerdy. And he was too intellectual for the hippies who just wanted to get wasted all the time. He was kind of an outsider. In high school everything revolved around what group you were in and if you werent in a carefully defined group you werent anybody. He was an individual in a world where individuality was suspect. By his senior year in late 1971 he was taking a freshman English class at Stanford and working on a Homestead underground film project with Chrisann Brennan. 27 28 Around that time Wozniak designed a low-cost digital blue box to generate the necessary tones to manipulate the telephone network allowing free long-distance calls. He was inspired by an article titled Secrets of the Little Blue Box from the October 1971 issue of Esquire . 29 Jobs decided then to sell them and split the profit with Wozniak. The clandestine sales of the illegal blue boxes went well and perhaps planted the seed in Jobss mind that electronics could be both fun and profitable. 30 In a 1994 interview he recalled that it took six months for him and Wozniak to design the blue boxes. 31 Jobs later reflected that had it not been for Wozniaks blue boxes there wouldnt have been an Apple . 32 He states it showed them that they could take on large companies and beat them. 33 34 By his senior year of high school Jobs began using LSD . 25 He later recalled that on one occasion he consumed it in a wheat field outside Sunnyvale and experienced the most wonderful feeling of my life up to that point . 35 In mid-1972 after graduation and before leaving for Reed College Jobs and Brennan rented a house from their other roommate Al. 36 Reed College In September 1972 Jobs enrolled at Reed College in Portland Oregon . 37 He insisted on applying only to Reed although it was an expensive school that Paul and Clara could ill afford. 38 Jobs soon befriended Robert Friedland 39 who was Reeds student body president at that time. 40 Brennan remained involved with Jobs while he was at Reed. I was interested in Eastern mysticism which hit the shores about then. At Reed there was a constant flow of people stopping by from Timothy Leary and Richard Alpert to Gary Snyder . There was a constant flow of intellectual questioning about the truth of life. That was the time when every college student in the country read Be Here Now and Diet for a Small Planet . Steve Jobs 41 After just one semester Jobs dropped out of Reed College without telling his parents. 42 Jobs later explained this was because he did not want to spend his parents money on an education that seemed meaningless to him. He continued to attend by auditing his classes 43 including a course on calligraphy that was taught by Robert Palladino . In a 2005 commencement speech at Stanford University Jobs stated that during this period he slept on the floor in friends dorm rooms returned Coke bottles for food money and got weekly free meals at the local Hare Krishna temple. In that same speech Jobs said: If I had never dropped in on that single calligraphy course in college the Mac would have never had multiple typefaces or proportionally spaced fonts . 44 19741985 See also: History of Apple 19711985: Jobs and Wozniak I was lucky to get into computers when it was a very young and idealistic industry. There werent many degrees offered in computer science so people in computers were brilliant people from mathematics physics music zoology whatever. They loved it and no one was really in it for the money ... There are people around here who start companies just to make money but the great companies well thats not what theyre about. Steve Jobs 45 Pre-Apple In February 1974 Jobs returned to his parents home in Los Altos and began looking for a job. 46 He was soon hired by Atari Inc. in Los Gatos California as a computer technician . 46 47 Back in 1973 Steve Wozniak designed his own version of the classic video game Pong and gave its electronics board to Jobs. According to Wozniak Atari only hired Jobs because he took the board down to the company and they thought that he had built it himself. 48 Ataris cofounder Nolan Bushnell later described him as difficult but valuable pointing out that he was very often the smartest guy in the room and he would let people know that . 49 Jobs traveled to India in mid-1974 50 to visit Neem Karoli Baba 51 at his Kainchi ashram with his Reed College friend and eventual Apple employee Daniel Kottke searching for spiritual teachings. When they got to the Neem Karoli ashram it was almost deserted because Neem Karoli Baba had died in September 1973. Then they made a long trek up a dry riverbed to an ashram of Haidakhan Babaji . 47 After seven months Jobs left India 52 and returned to the US ahead of Daniel Kottke. 47 Jobs had changed his appearance; his head was shaved and he wore traditional Indian clothing . 53 54 During this time Jobs experimented with psychedelics later calling his LSD experiences one of the two or three most important things he had done in his life . 55 56 He spent a period at the All One Farm a commune in Oregon that was owned by Robert Friedland . During this time period Jobs and Brennan both became practitioners of Zen Buddhism through the Zen master Kobun Chino Otogawa . Jobs engaged in lengthy meditation retreats at the Tassajara Zen Mountain Center the oldest Soto Zen monastery in the US. 57 He considered taking up monastic residence at Eihei-ji in Japan and maintained a lifelong appreciation for Zen 58 Japanese cuisine and artists such as Hasui Kawase . 59 Jobs returned to Atari in early 1975 and that summer Bushnell assigned him to create a circuit board for the arcade video game Breakout in as few chips as possible knowing that Jobs would recruit Wozniak for help. During his day job at HP Wozniak drew sketches of the circuit design; at night he joined Jobs at Atari and continued to refine the design which Jobs implemented on a breadboard . 60 According to Bushnell Atari offered 100 equivalent to about 600 in 2023 for each TTL chip that was eliminated in the machine. Jobs made a deal with Wozniak to split the fee evenly between them if Wozniak could minimize the number of chips. Much to the amazement of Atari engineers within four days Wozniak reduced the TTL count to 45 far below the usual 100 though Atari later re-engineered it to make it easier to test and add a few missing features. 61 According to Wozniak Jobs told him that Atari paid them only 750 instead of the actual 5 000 and that Wozniaks share was thus 375. 62 Wozniak did not learn about the actual bonus until ten years later but said that if Jobs had told him about it and explained that he needed the money Wozniak would have given it to him. 63 Jobs and Wozniak attended meetings of the Homebrew Computer Club in 1975 which was a stepping stone to the development and marketing of the first Apple computer. 64 According to a document released by the United States Department of Defense Jobs claimed that in 1975 he was arrested in Eugene Oregon after being questioned for being a minor in possession of alcohol. Jobs alleged that he didnt have any alcohol but police questioned him and subsequently determined that he had an outstanding arrest warrant for an unpaid speeding ticket. Jobs claimed he then paid the 50 fine. The arrest allegedly occurred behind a store . 65 66 Apple 19761985 Basically Steve Wozniak and I invented the Apple because we wanted a personal computer. Not only couldnt we afford the computers that were on the market those computers were impractical for us to use. We needed a Volkswagen . The Volkswagen isnt as fast or comfortable as other ways of traveling but the VW owners can go where they want when they want and with whom they want. The VW owners have personal control of their car. Steve Jobs 67 By March 1976 Wozniak completed the basic design of the Apple I computer and showed it to Jobs who suggested that they sell it; Wozniak was at first skeptical of the idea but later agreed. 68 In April of that same year Jobs Wozniak and administrative overseer Ronald Wayne founded Apple Computer Company now called Apple Inc. as a business partnership in Jobss parents Crist Drive home on April 1 1976. The operation originally started in Jobss bedroom and later moved to the garage. 69 70 Wayne stayed briefly leaving Jobs and Wozniak as the active primary cofounders of the company. 71 The two decided on the name Apple after Jobs returned from the All One Farm commune in Oregon and told Wozniak about his time in the farms apple orchard . 72 Jobs originally planned to produce bare printed circuit boards of the Apple I and sell them to computer hobbyists for 50 equivalent to about 270 in 2023 each. To fund the first batch Wozniak sold his HP scientific calculator and Jobs sold his Volkswagen van . 73 74 Later that year computer retailer Paul Terrell purchased 50 fully assembled Apple I units for 500 each. 75 76 Eventually about 200 Apple I computers were produced in total. 77 External image Jobs and Steve Wozniak with an Apple I circuit board c. 1976. A neighbor on Crist Drive recalled Jobs as an odd individual who would greet his clients with his underwear hanging out barefoot and hippie-like . Another neighbor Larry Waterland who had just earned his PhD in chemical engineering at Stanford recalled dismissing Jobss budding business compared to the established industry of giant mainframe computers with big decks of punch cards: Steve took me over to the garage. He had a circuit board with a chip on it a DuMont TV set a Panasonic cassette tape deck and a keyboard. He said This is an Apple computer. I said Youve got to be joking. I dismissed the whole idea. Jobss friend from Reed College and India Daniel Kottke recalled that as an early Apple employee he was the only person who worked in the garage ... Woz would show up once a week with his latest code. Steve Jobs didnt get his hands dirty in that sense. Kottke also stated that much of the early work took place in Jobss kitchen where he spent hours on the phone trying to find investors for the company. 21 They received funding from a then-semi-retired Intel product marketing manager and engineer named Mike Markkula . 78 Scott McNealy one of the cofounders of Sun Microsystems said that Jobs broke a glass age ceiling in Silicon Valley because hed created a very successful company at a young age. 34 Markkula brought Apple to the attention of Arthur Rock which after looking at the crowded Apple booth at the Home Brew Computer Show started with a 60 000 investment and went on the Apple board. 79 Jobs was not pleased when Markkula recruited Mike Scott from National Semiconductor in February 1977 to serve as the first president and CEO of Apple. 80 81 For what characterizes Apple is that its scientific staff always acted and performed like artists in a field filled with dry personalities limited by the rational and binary worlds they inhabit Apples engineering teams had passion. They always believed that what they were doing was important and most of all fun. Working at Apple was never just a job; it was also a crusade a mission to bring better computer power to people. At its roots that attitude came from Steve Jobs. It was Power to the People the slogan of the sixties rewritten in technology for the eighties and called Macintosh . Jeffrey S. Young 1987 82 After Brennan returned from her own journey to India she and Jobs fell in love again as Brennan noted changes in him that she attributes to Kobun whom she was also still following. It was also at this time that Jobs displayed a prototype Apple II computer for Brennan and his parents in their living room. Brennan notes a shift in this time period where the two main influences on Jobs were Apple Inc. and Kobun . In April 1977 Jobs and Wozniak introduced the Apple II at the West Coast Computer Faire . 83 It is the first consumer product to have been sold by Apple Computer. Primarily designed by Wozniak Jobs oversaw the development of its unusual case and Rod Holt developed the unique power supply. 84 During the design stage Jobs argued that the Apple II should have two expansion slots while Wozniak wanted eight. After a heated argument Wozniak threatened that Jobs should go get himself another computer . They later agreed on eight slots. 85 The Apple II became one of the first highly successful mass-produced microcomputer products in the world. 86 As Jobs became more successful with his new company his relationship with Brennan grew more complex. In 1977 the success of Apple was now a part of their relationship and Brennan Daniel Kottke and Jobs moved into a house near the Apple office in Cupertino . 87 Brennan eventually took a position in the shipping department at Apple. 88 Brennans relationship with Jobs deteriorated as his position with Apple grew and she began to consider ending the relationship. In October 1977 Brennan was approached by Rod Holt who asked her to take a paid apprenticeship designing blueprints for the Apples . 89 Both Holt and Jobs believed that it would be a good position for her given her artistic abilities. Holt was particularly eager that she take the position and puzzled by her ambivalence toward it. Brennans decision however was overshadowed by the fact that she realized she was pregnant and that Jobs was the father. It took her a few days to tell Jobs whose face according to Brennan turned ugly at the news. At the same time according to Brennan at the beginning of her third trimester Jobs said to her: I never wanted to ask that you get an abortion. I just didnt want to do that. 90 He also refused to discuss the pregnancy with her. 90 Brennan turned down the internship and decided to leave Apple. A few weeks before she was due to give birth Brennan was invited to deliver her baby at the All One Farm. She accepted the offer. 89 When Jobs was 23 the same age as his biological parents when they had him 90 Brennan gave birth to her baby Lisa Brennan on May 17 1978. 89 Jobs went there for the birth after he was contacted by Robert Friedland their mutual friend and the farm owner. While distant Jobs worked with her on a name for the baby which they discussed while sitting in the fields on a blanket. Brennan suggested the name Lisa which Jobs also liked and notes that Jobs was very attached to the name Lisa while he was also publicly denying paternity . She would discover later that during this time Jobs was preparing to unveil a new kind of computer that he wanted to give a female name his first choice was Claire after St. Clare . She stated that she never gave him permission to use the babys name for a computer and he hid the plans from her. Jobs worked with his team to come up with the phrase Local Integrated Software Architecture as an alternative explanation for the Apple Lisa . 91 Decades later however Jobs admitted to his biographer Walter Isaacson that obviously it was named for my daughter . 92 When Jobs denied paternity a DNA test established him as Lisas father. 93 It required him to pay Brennan 385 equivalent to about 1 200 in 2023 monthly in addition to returning the welfare money she had received. Jobs paid her 500 equivalent to about 1 500 in 2023 monthly at the time when Apple went public and made him a millionaire. Later Brennan agreed to interview with Michael Moritz for Time magazine for its Time Person of the Year special released on January 3 1983 in which she discussed her relationship with Jobs. Rather than name Jobs the Person of the Year the magazine named the generic personal computer the Machine of the Year . 94 In the issue Jobs questioned the reliability of the paternity test which stated that the probability of paternity for Jobs Steven... is 94.1 . 93 He responded by arguing that 28 of the male population of the United States could be the father . Time also noted that the baby girl and the machine on which Apple has placed so much hope for the future share the same name: Lisa . 93 In 1978 at age 23 Jobs was worth over 1 million equivalent to 4.67 million in 2023. By age 25 his net worth grew to an estimated 250 million equivalent to 838 million in 2023. He was also one of the youngest people ever to make the Forbes list of the nations richest peopleand one of only a handful to have done it themselves without inherited wealth . 95 In 1982 Jobs bought an apartment on the top two floors of The San Remo a Manhattan building with a politically progressive reputation. Although he never lived there 96 he spent years renovating it thanks to I. M. Pei . In 1983 Jobs lured John Sculley away from Pepsi-Cola to serve as Apples CEO asking Do you want to spend the rest of your life selling sugared water or do you want a chance to change the world? . 97 In 1984 Jobs bought the Jackling House and estate and resided there for a decade. Thereafter he leased it out for several years until 2000 when he stopped maintaining the house allowing weathering to degrade it. In 2004 Jobs received permission from the town of Woodside to demolish the house to build a smaller contemporary styled one. After a few years in court the house was finally demolished in 2011 a few months before he died. 98 A Macintosh prototype c. 1981 Jobs and the Macintosh 1984 Jobs took over development of the Macintosh in 1981 from early Apple employee Jef Raskin who had conceived the project. Wozniak and Raskin had heavily influenced the early program and Wozniak was on leave during this time due to an airplane crash earlier that year making it easier for Jobs to take over the project. 99 100 101 On January 22 1984 Apple aired a Super Bowl television commercial titled 1984 which ended with the words: On January 24th Apple Computer will introduce Macintosh. And youll see why 1984 wont be like 1984 . 102 On January 24 1984 an emotional Jobs introduced the Macintosh to a wildly enthusiastic audience at Apples annual shareholders meeting held in the Flint Auditorium at De Anza College. 103 104 Macintosh engineer Andy Hertzfeld described the scene as pandemonium . 105 The Macintosh was inspired by the Lisa in turn inspired by Xerox PARCs mouse -driven graphical user interface 106 107 and it was widely acclaimed by the media with strong initial sales. 108 109 However its low performance and limited range of available software led to a rapid sales decline in the second half of 1984. 108 109 110 Sculleys and Jobss respective visions for the company greatly differed. Sculley favored open architecture computers like the Apple II targeting education small business and home markets less vulnerable to IBM. Jobs wanted the company to focus on the closed architecture Macintosh as a business alternative to the IBM PC. President and CEO Sculley had little control over chairman of the board Jobss Macintosh division; it and the Apple II division operated like separate companies duplicating services. 111 Although its products provided 85 of Apples sales in early 1985 the companys January 1985 annual meeting did not mention the Apple II division or employees. Many left including Wozniak who stated that the company had been going in the wrong direction for the last five years and sold most of his stock. 112 Though frustrated with the companys and Jobss dismissal of the Apple II in favor of the Macintosh Wozniak left amicably and remained an honorary employee of Apple maintaining a lifelong friendship with Jobs. 113 114 115 Jobs with software developer Wendell Brown 1984 By early 1985 the Macintoshs failure to defeat the IBM PC became clear 108 109 and it strengthened Sculleys position in the company. In May 1985 Sculleyencouraged by Arthur Rockdecided to reorganize Apple and proposed a plan to the board that would remove Jobs from the Macintosh group and put him in charge of New Product Development . This move would effectively render Jobs powerless within Apple. 116 In response Jobs then developed a plan to get rid of Sculley and take over Apple. However Jobs was confronted after the plan was leaked and he said that he would leave Apple. The Board declined his resignation and asked him to reconsider. Sculley also told Jobs that he had all of the votes needed to go ahead with the reorganization. A few months later on September 17 1985 Jobs submitted a letter of resignation to the Apple Board. Five additional senior Apple employees also resigned and joined Jobs in his new venture NeXT. 117 The Macintoshs struggle continued after Jobs left Apple. Though marketed and received in fanfare the expensive Macintosh was hard to sell. 118 : 308309 In 1985 Bill Gates s then-developing company Microsoft threatened to stop developing Mac applications unless it was granted a license for the Mac operating system software. Microsoft was developing its graphical user interface ... for DOS which it was calling Windows and didnt want Apple to sue over the similarities between the Windows GUI and the Mac interface. 118 : 321 Sculley granted Microsoft the license which later led to problems for Apple. 118 : 321 In addition cheap IBM PC clones that ran Microsoft software and had a graphical user interface began to appear. Although the Macintosh preceded the clones it was far more expensive so through the late 1980s the Windows user interface was getting better and better and was thus taking increasingly more share from Apple . 118 : 322 Windows-based IBM-PC clones also led to the development of additional GUIs such as IBMs TopView or Digital Researchs GEM 118 : 322 and thus the graphical user interface was beginning to be taken for granted undermining the most apparent advantage of the Mac...it seemed clear as the 1980s wound down that Apple couldnt go it alone indefinitely against the whole IBM-clone market . 118 : 322 19851997 NeXT computer See also: NeXT Following his resignation from Apple in 1985 Jobs founded NeXT Inc. 119 with 7 million. A year later he was running out of money and he sought venture capital with no product on the horizon. Eventually Jobs attracted the attention of billionaire Ross Perot who invested heavily in the company. 120 The NeXT computer was shown to the world in what was considered Jobss comeback event 121 a lavish invitation-only gala launch event 122 that was described as a multimedia extravaganza. 123 The celebration was held at the Louise M. Davies Symphony Hall San Francisco California on Wednesday October 12 1988. Steve Wozniak said in a 2013 interview that while Jobs was at NeXT he was really getting his head together . 99 NeXT workstations were first released in 1990 and priced at 9 999 equivalent to about 23 000 in 2023. Like the Apple Lisa the NeXT workstation was technologically advanced and designed for the education sector but was largely dismissed as cost prohibitive. 124 The NeXT workstation was known for its technical strengths chief among them its object-oriented software development system. Jobs marketed NeXT products to the financial scientific and academic community highlighting its innovative experimental new technologies such as the Mach kernel the digital signal processor chip and the built-in Ethernet port. Making use of a NeXT computer English computer scientist Tim Berners-Lee invented the World Wide Web in 1990 at CERN in Switzerland. 125 The revised second generation NeXTcube was released in 1990. Jobs touted it as the first interpersonal computer that would replace the personal computer. With its innovative NeXTMail multimedia email system NeXTcube could share voice image graphics and video in email for the first time. Interpersonal computing is going to revolutionize human communications and groupwork Jobs told reporters. 126 Jobs ran NeXT with an obsession for aesthetic perfection as evidenced by the development of and attention to NeXTcubes magnesium case. 127 This put considerable strain on NeXTs hardware division and in 1993 after having sold only 50 000 machines NeXT transitioned fully to software development with the release of NeXTSTEP Intel . 128 The company reported its first yearly profit of 1.03 million in 1994. 129 In 1996 NeXT Software Inc. released WebObjects a framework for Web application development. After NeXT was acquired by Apple Inc. in 1997 WebObjects was used to build and run the Apple Store 128 MobileMe services and the iTunes Store. 130 Pixar and Disney In 1986 Jobs funded the spinout of The Graphics Group later renamed Pixar from Lucasfilm s computer graphics division for the price of 10 million 5 million of which was given to the company as capital and 5 million of which was paid to Lucasfilm for technology rights. 131 Jobs and his Pixar team visited the Oval Office in 1998. The first film produced by Pixar with its Disney partnership Toy Story 1995 with Jobs credited as executive producer 132 brought financial success and critical acclaim to the studio when it was released. Over the course of Jobss life under Pixars creative chief John Lasseter the company produced box-office hits A Bugs Life 1998 Toy Story 2 1999 Monsters Inc. 2001 Finding Nemo 2003 The Incredibles 2004 Cars 2006 Ratatouille 2007 WALL-E 2008 Up 2009 Toy Story 3 2010 and Cars 2 2011. Brave 2012 Pixars first film to be produced since Jobss death honored him with a tribute for his contributions to the studio. 133 Finding Nemo The Incredibles Ratatouille WALL-E Up Toy Story 3 and Brave each received the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature an award introduced in 2001. 134 135 In 2003 and 2004 as Pixars contract with Disney was running out Jobs and Disney chief executive Michael Eisner tried but failed to negotiate a new partnership 136 and in January 2004 Jobs announced that he would never deal with Disney again. 137 In October 2005 Bob Iger replaced Eisner at Disney and Iger quickly worked to mend relations with Jobs and Pixar. On January 24 2006 Jobs and Iger announced that Disney had agreed to purchase Pixar in an all-stock transaction worth 7.4 billion. When the deal closed Jobs became The Walt Disney Companys largest single shareholder with approximately seven percent of the companys stock. 138 Jobss holdings in Disney far exceeded those of Eisner who holds 1.7 and of Disney family member Roy E. Disney who until his 2009 death held about 1 of the companys stock and whose criticisms of Eisnerespecially that he soured Disneys relationship with Pixaraccelerated Eisners ousting. Upon completion of the merger Jobs received 7 of Disney shares and joined the board of directors as the largest individual shareholder. 138 139 140 Upon Jobss death his shares in Disney were transferred to the Steven P. Jobs Trust led by Laurene Jobs . 141 After Jobss death Iger recalled in 2019 that many warned him about Jobs that he would bully me and everyone else . Iger wrote Who wouldnt want Steve Jobs to have influence over how a company is run? and that as an active Disney board member he rarely created trouble for me. Not never but rarely. He speculated that they would have seriously considered merging Disney and Apple had Jobs lived. 137 Floyd Norman of Pixar described Jobs as a mature mellow individual who never interfered with the creative process of the filmmakers. 142 In early June 2014 Pixar cofounder and Walt Disney Animation Studios President Edwin Catmull revealed that Jobs once advised him to just explain it to them until they understand in disagreements. Catmull released the book Creativity Inc. in 2014 in which he recounts numerous experiences of working with Jobs. Regarding his own manner of dealing with Jobs Catmull writes: 143 In all the 26 years with Steve Steve and I never had one of these loud verbal arguments and its not my nature to do that. ... but we did disagree fairly frequently about things. ... I would say something to him and he would immediately shoot it down because he could think faster than I could. ... I would then wait a week ... Id call him up and I give my counterargument to what he had said and hed immediately shoot it down. So I had to wait another week and occasionally this went on for months. But ultimately one of three things happened. About a third of the time he said Oh I get it youre right and that was the end of it. And it was another third of the time in which Id say Actually I think he is right . The other third of the time where we didnt reach consensus he just let me do it my way never said anything more about it. 143 19972011 Return to Apple See also: Apple Inc. 19972007: Return to profitability Jobs presented at Macworld Conference Expo in 2005 In 1996 Jobss former company Apple was struggling and its survival depended on completing its next operating system. After failed negotiations to purchase Be Inc. 144 145 Apple eventually came to a deal with NeXT in December 146 for 400 million; the deal was finalized in February 1997 bringing Jobs back to the company he had cofounded. 147 Jobs became de facto chief after then-CEO Gil Amelio was ousted in July 1997. He was formally named interim chief executive on September 16. 148 In March 1998 to concentrate Apples efforts on returning to profitability Jobs terminated several projects such as Newton Cyberdog and OpenDoc . In the coming months many employees developed a fear of encountering Jobs while riding in the elevator afraid that they might not have a job when the doors opened. The reality was that Jobss summary executions were rare but a handful of victims was enough to terrorize a whole company. 149 Jobs changed the licensing program for Macintosh clones making it too costly for the manufacturers to continue making machines. With the purchase of NeXT much of the companys technology found its way into Apple products most notably NeXTSTEP which evolved into Mac OS X. Under Jobss guidance the company increased sales significantly with the introduction of the iMac and other new products; since then appealing designs and powerful branding have worked well for Apple. At the 2000 Macworld Expo Jobs officially dropped the interim modifier from his title at Apple and became permanent CEO. 150 Jobs quipped at the time that he would be using the title iCEO . 151 The company subsequently branched out introducing and improving upon other digital appliances. With the introduction of the iPod portable music player iTunes digital music software and the iTunes Store the company made forays into consumer electronics and music distribution. On June 29 2007 Apple entered the cellular phone business with the introduction of the iPhone a multi-touch display cell phone which also included the features of an iPod and with its own mobile browser revolutionized the mobile browsing scene. While nurturing open-ended innovation Jobs also reminded his employees that real artists ship . 152 Jobs had a public war of words with Dell Computer CEO Michael Dell starting in 1987 when Jobs first criticized Dell for making un-innovative beige boxes . 153 On October 6 1997 at a Gartner Symposium when Dell was asked what he would do if he ran the then-troubled Apple Computer company he said: Id shut it down and give the money back to the shareholders . 154 Then in 2006 Jobs emailed all employees when Apples market capitalization rose above Dells. It read: Team it turned out that Michael Dell wasnt perfect at predicting the future. Based on todays stock market close Apple is worth more than Dell. Stocks go up and down and things may be different tomorrow but I thought it was worth a moment of reflection today. Steve. 155 Jobs was both admired and criticized for his consummate skill at persuasion and salesmanship which has been dubbed the reality distortion field and was particularly evident during his keynote speeches colloquially known as Stevenotes at Macworld Expos and at Apple Worldwide Developers Conferences . 156 Jobs usually went to work wearing a black long-sleeved mock turtleneck made by Issey Miyake Levis 501 blue jeans and New Balance 991 sneakers. 157 158 Jobs told his biographer Walter Isaacson ...he came to like the idea of having a uniform for himself both because of its daily convenience the rationale he claimed and its ability to convey a signature style . 157 Jobs and Bill Gates were a panel at the fifth D: All Things Digital conference in 2007. In 2001 Jobs was granted stock options in the amount of 7.5 million shares of Apple with an exercise price of 18.30. It was alleged that the options had been backdated and that the exercise price should have been 21.10. It was further alleged that Jobs had thereby incurred taxable income of 20 000 000 that he did not report and that Apple overstated its earnings by that same amount. As a result Jobs potentially faced a number of criminal charges and civil penalties. The case was the subject of active criminal and civil government investigations 159 though an independent internal Apple investigation completed on December 29 2006 found that Jobs was unaware of these issues and that the options granted to him were returned without being exercised in 2003. 160 In 2005 Jobs responded to criticism of Apples poor recycling programs for e-waste in the US by lashing out at environmental and other advocates at Apples annual meeting in Cupertino in April. A few weeks later Apple announced it would take back iPods for free at its retail stores. The Computer TakeBack Campaign responded by flying a banner from a plane over the Stanford University graduation at which Jobs was the commencement speaker. The banner read Steve dont be a mini-playerrecycle all e-waste . 161 In 2006 he further expanded Apples recycling programs to any US customer who buys a new Mac. This program includes shipping and environmentally friendly disposal of their old systems. 162 The success of Apples unique products and services provided several years of stable financial returns propelling Apple to become the worlds most valuable publicly traded company in 2011. 163 Jobs was perceived as a demanding perfectionist 164 165 who always aspired to position his businesses and their products at the forefront of the information technology industry by foreseeing and setting innovation and style trends. He summed up this self-concept at the end of his keynote speech at the Macworld Conference and Expo in January 2007 by quoting ice hockey player Wayne Gretzky : Theres an old Wayne Gretzky quote that I love. I skate to where the puck is going to be not where it has been . And weve always tried to do that at Apple. Since the very very beginning. And we always will. 166 On July 1 2008 a 7 billion class action suit was filed against several members of the Apple board of directors for revenue lost because of alleged securities fraud. 167 168 In a 2011 interview with biographer Walter Isaacson Jobs revealed that he had met with US President Barack Obama complained about the nations shortage of software engineers and told Obama that he was headed for a one-term presidency . 169 Jobs proposed that any foreign student who got an engineering degree at a US university should automatically be offered a green card. After the meeting Jobs commented The president is very smart but he kept explaining to us reasons why things cant get done ... It infuriates me . 169 Health problems In October 2003 Jobs was diagnosed with cancer . In mid 2004 he announced to his employees that he had a cancerous tumor in his pancreas . 170 The prognosis for pancreatic cancer is very poor; 171 Jobs stated that he had a rare less aggressive type known as islet cell neuroendocrine tumor. 170 Jobs resisted his doctors recommendations for medical intervention for nine months 172 in favor of alternative medicine . Other doctors agree that Jobss diet was insufficient to address his disease. However cancer researcher and alternative medicine critic David Gorski wrote that its impossible to know whether and by how much he might have decreased his chances of surviving his cancer through his flirtation with woo. My best guess was that Jobs probably only modestly decreased his chances of survival if that. 173 174 Barrie R. Cassileth the chief of Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center s integrative medicine department 175 on the other hand said Jobss faith in alternative medicine likely cost him his life ... He had the only kind of pancreatic cancer that is treatable and curable ... He essentially committed suicide. 176 According to biographer Walter Isaacson for nine months he refused to undergo surgery for his pancreatic cancer a decision he later regretted as his health declined . 177 Instead he tried a vegan diet acupuncture herbal remedies and other treatments he found online and even consulted a psychic. He was also influenced by a doctor who ran a clinic that advised juice fasts bowel cleansings and other unproven approaches before finally having surgery in July 2004. 178 179 He underwent a pancreaticoduodenectomy or Whipple procedure that appeared to remove the tumor successfully. 180 181 Jobs did not receive chemotherapy or radiation therapy . 170 182 During Jobss absence Tim Cook head of worldwide sales and operations at Apple ran the company. 170 In January 2006 only Jobss wife his doctors and Iger knew that his cancer had returned. Jobs told Iger privately that he hoped to live to see his own son Reeds high school graduation in 2010. 137 In early August 2006 Jobs delivered the keynote for Apples annual Worldwide Developers Conference. His thin almost gaunt appearance and unusually listless delivery 183 184 together with his choice to delegate significant portions of his keynote to other presenters inspired a flurry of media and internet speculation about the state of his health. 185 In contrast according to an Ars Technica journal report Worldwide Developers Conference WWDC attendees who saw Jobs in person said he looked fine . 186 Following the keynote an Apple spokesperson said that Steves health is robust . 187 Two years later similar concerns followed Jobss 2008 WWDC keynote address. 188 Apple officials stated that Jobs was victim to a common bug and was taking antibiotics 189 while others surmised his cachectic appearance was due to the Whipple procedure. 182 During a July conference call discussing Apple earnings participants responded to repeated questions about Jobss health by insisting that it was a private matter . Others said that shareholders had a right to know more given Jobss hands-on approach to running his company. 190 191 Based on an off-the-record phone conversation with Jobs The New York Times reported While his health problems amounted to a good deal more than a common bug they werent life-threatening and he doesnt have a recurrence of cancer . 192 On August 28 2008 Bloomberg mistakenly published a 2500-word obituary of Jobs in its corporate news service containing blank spaces for his age and cause of death. News carriers customarily stockpile up-to-date obituaries to facilitate news delivery in the event of a well-known figures death. Although the error was promptly rectified many news carriers and blogs reported on it 193 intensifying rumors concerning Jobss health. 194 Jobs responded at Apples September 2008 Lets Rock keynote by paraphrasing Mark Twain : The reports of my death are greatly exaggerated. 195 196 At a subsequent media event Jobs concluded his presentation with a slide reading 11070 referring to his blood pressure stating he would not address further questions about his health. 197 On December 16 2008 Apple announced that marketing vice-president Phil Schiller would deliver the companys final keynote address at the Macworld Conference and Expo 2009 again reviving questions about Jobss health. 198 199 In a statement given on January 5 2009 on Apple.com Jobs said that he had been suffering from a hormone imbalance for several months. 200 201 On January 14 2009 Jobs wrote in an internal Apple memo that in the previous week he had learned that my health-related issues are more complex than I originally thought . 202 He announced a six-month leave of absence until the end of June 2009 to allow him to better focus on his health. Tim Cook who previously acted as CEO in Jobss 2004 absence became acting CEO of Apple with Jobs still involved with major strategic decisions . 202 In 2009 Tim Cook offered a portion of his liver to Jobs since both share a rare blood type and the donor liver can regenerate tissue after such an operation. Jobs yelled Ill never let you do that. Ill never do that. 203 In April 2009 Jobs underwent a liver transplantation at Methodist University Hospital Transplant Institute in Memphis Tennessee . 204 205 206 Jobss prognosis was described as excellent . 204 Resignation On January 17 2011 a year and a half after Jobs returned to work following the liver transplant Apple announced that he had been granted another leave of absence. Jobs announced his leave in a letter to employees stating his decision was made so he could focus on his health . As it did at the time of his 2009 medical leave Apple announced that Tim Cook would run day-to-day operations and that Jobs would continue to be involved in major strategic decisions at the company. 207 208 While on leave Jobs appeared at the iPad 2 launch event on March 2 the WWDC keynote introducing iCloud on June 6 and before the Cupertino City Council on June 7. 209 On August 24 2011 Jobs announced his resignation as Apples CEO writing to the board I have always said if there ever came a day when I could no longer meet my duties and expectations as Apples CEO I would be the first to let you know. Unfortunately that day has come. 210 Jobs became chairman of the board and named Tim Cook as his successor as CEO. 211 212 Jobs continued to work for Apple until the day before his death six weeks later. 213 214 215 Death Flags flew at half-staff outside the Apple Infinite Loop campus on the evening of Jobss death. Jobs died at his home in Palo Alto California around 3 p.m. PDT on October 5 2011 due to complications from a relapse of his previously treated islet-cell pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor 64 216 217 which resulted in respiratory arrest . 218 He had lost consciousness the day before and died with his wife children and sisters at his side. 219 His sister Mona Simpson described his death thus: Steves final words hours earlier were monosyllables repeated three times. Before embarking hed looked at his sister Patty then for a long time at his children then at his lifes partner Laurene and then over their shoulders past them. Steves final words were: Oh wow. Oh wow. Oh wow. He then lost consciousness and died several hours later. 219 A small private funeral was held on October 7 2011 the details of which out of respect for Jobss family were not made public. 220 Both Apple 221 and Pixar issued announcements of his death. 222 Apple announced on the same day that they had no plans for a public service but were encouraging well-wishers to send their remembrance messages to an email address created to receive such messages. 223 Apple and Microsoft both flew their flags at half-staff throughout their respective headquarters and campuses. 224 225 Bob Iger ordered all Disney properties including Walt Disney World and Disneyland to fly their flags at half-staff from October 6 to 12 2011. 226 For two weeks following his death Apple displayed on its corporate Web site a simple page that showed Jobss name and lifespan next to his portrait in grayscale. 227 228 229 On October 19 2011 Apple employees held a private memorial service for Jobs on the Apple campus in Cupertino. It was attended by Jobss widow Laurene and by Tim Cook Bill Campbell Norah Jones Al Gore and Coldplay . Some of Apples retail stores closed briefly so employees could attend the memorial. A video of the service was uploaded to Apples website. 230 California Governor Jerry Brown declared Sunday October 16 2011 to be Steve Jobs Day . 231 On that day an invitation-only memorial was held at Stanford University . Those in attendance included Apple and other tech company executives members of the media celebrities politicians and family and close friends of Jobs. Bono Yo-Yo Ma and Joan Baez performed at the service which lasted longer than an hour. There was high security with guards at all of the universitys gates and a helicopter overhead from an area news station. 232 233 Each attendee was given a small brown box as a farewell gift from Jobs containing a copy of the Autobiography of a Yogi 1946 by Paramahansa Yogananda . 234 Childhood friend and fellow Apple co-founder Steve Wozniak 235 former owner of what would become Pixar George Lucas 236 his competitor Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates 237 and President Barack Obama 238 all made statements in response to his death. At his request Jobs was buried in an unmarked grave at Alta Mesa Memorial Park the only nonsectarian cemetery in Palo Alto. 239 240 Innovations and designs Jobss design aesthetic was influenced by philosophies of Zen and Buddhism. In India he experienced Buddhism while on his seven-month spiritual journey 241 and his sense of intuition was influenced by the spiritual people with whom he studied. 241 Jobs gained insights regarding industrial designs from Richard Sapper . 242 According to Apple co-founder Wozniak Steve didnt ever code. He wasnt an engineer and he didnt do any original design... . 243 244 Daniel Kottke one of Apples earliest employees and a college friend of Jobs stated: Between Woz and Jobs Woz was the innovator the inventor. Steve Jobs was the marketing person. 245 He is listed as either primary inventor or co-inventor in 346 United States patents or patent applications related to a range of technologies from actual computer and portable devices to user interfaces including touch-based speakers keyboards power adapters staircases clasps sleeves lanyards and packages. His contributions to most of his patents were to the look and feel of the product . He and his industrial design chief Jonathan Ive are named for 200 of the patents. 246 Most of these are design patents as opposed to utility patents or inventions; they are specific product designs such as both original and lamp-style iMacs and PowerBook G4 Titanium . 247 248 He holds 43 issued US patents on inventions. 247 The patent on the Mac OS X Dock user interface with magnification feature was issued the day before he died. 249 Although Jobs had little involvement in the engineering and technical side of the original Apple computers 244 Jobs later used his CEO position to directly involve himself with product design. 250 Involved in many projects throughout his career was his long-time marketing executive and confidant Joanna Hoffman known as one of the few employees at Apple and NeXT who could successfully stand up to Jobs while also engaging with him. 251 Even while terminally ill in the hospital Jobs sketched new devices that would hold the iPad in a hospital bed. 219 He despised the oxygen monitor on his finger and suggested ways to revise the design for simplicity. 252 Apple I Main article: Apple I The Apple I was designed entirely by Wozniak but Jobs had the idea of selling the computer which led to the founding of Apple Computer in 1976. Jobs and Wozniak constructed several of the Apple I prototype by hand funded by selling some of their belongings. Eventually 200 units were produced. 77 One of the main innovations of the Apple I was that it included video display terminal circuitry on its circuit board allowing it to connect to a low-cost composite video monitor or television instead of an expensive computer terminal compared to most existing computers at the time. Apple II Main article: Apple II The Apple II here with an external modem was designed primarily by Steve Wozniak . The Apple II is an 8-bit home computer one of the worlds first highly successful mass-produced microcomputer products 86 designed primarily by Wozniak. Jobs oversaw the development of the Apple IIs unusual case 253 and Rod Holt developed the unique power supply. 84 It was introduced in 1977 at the West Coast Computer Faire by Jobs and Wozniak as the first consumer product sold by Apple. The Apple II was first sold on June 10 1977. 254 255 Lisa Main article: Apple Lisa The Lisa is a personal computer developed by Apple from 1978 and sold in the early 1980s to business users. It is the first personal computer with a graphical user interface . 256 The Lisa sold poorly at 100 000 units 257 but despite being considered a commercial failure it received technical acclaim introducing several advanced features that reappeared on the Macintosh and eventually IBM PC compatibles . In 1982 after Jobs was forced out of the Lisa project 258 he took over the Macintosh project adding inspiration from Lisa. The final Lisa 210 was modified and sold as the Macintosh XL . 259 Macintosh Main article: Mac computer Jobs holds up a MacBook Air at the MacWorld Conference Expo 2008 Once he joined the Macintosh team Jobs took over the project after Wozniak had experienced a traumatic airplane accident and temporarily left the company. 99 Jobs launched the Macintosh on January 24 1984 as the first mass-market personal computer featuring an integral graphical user interface and mouse . 260 This first model was later renamed to Macintosh 128k among the prolific series. Since 1998 Apple has phased out the Macintosh name in favor of Mac though the product family has been nicknamed Mac or the Mac since inception. The Macintosh was introduced by a US1.5 million Ridley Scott television commercial 1984 . 261 It aired during the third quarter of Super Bowl XVIII on January 22 1984 received as a watershed event 262 and a masterpiece . 263 Regis McKenna called the ad more successful than the Mac itself . 264 It uses an unnamed heroine to represent the coming of the Macintosh indicated by a Picasso -style picture of the computer on her white tank top to save humanity from the conformity of IBMs domination of the computer industry. The ad alludes to George Orwell s novel Nineteen Eighty-Four which describes a dystopian future ruled by a televised Big Brother . 265 266 The Macintosh however was expensive which hindered its ability to be competitive in a market already dominated by the Commodore 64 for consumers and the IBM Personal Computer and its accompanying clone market for businesses. 267 Macintosh systems still found success in education and desktop publishing and kept Apple as the second-largest PC manufacturer for the next decade. NeXT Computer Main article: NeXT Computer After Jobs was forced out of Apple in 1985 he started NeXT a workstation computer company. The NeXT Computer was introduced in 1988 at a lavish launch event . Using the NeXT Computer Tim Berners-Lee created the worlds first web browser the WorldWideWeb . The NeXT Computers operating system named NeXTSTEP begat Darwin which is now the foundation of most of Apples operating systems such as Macintoshs macOS and iPhones iOS . 268 269 iMac Main article: iMac The original iMac was introduced in 1998 as the first consumer-facing Apple product to have debuted after Jobss return. Apples iMac G3 was introduced in 1998 and its innovative design is directly the result of Jobss return to Apple. Apple boasted the back of our computer looks better than the front of anyone elses . 270 Described as cartoonlike the first iMac clad in Bondi Blue plastic was unlike any personal computer that came before. In 1999 Apple introduced the Graphite gray Apple iMac and since has varied the shape color and size considerably while maintaining the all-in-one design. Design ideas were intended to create a connection with the user such as the handle and a breathing light effect when the computer went to sleep. 271 The Apple iMac sold for 1 299 at that time. The iMacs forward-thinking changes include eschewing the floppy disk drive and moving exclusively to USB for connecting peripherals. Through the iMacs success USB was popularized among third-party peripheral makersas evidenced by the fact that many early USB peripherals were made of translucent plastic to match the iMac design. 272 iTunes Main article: iTunes iTunes is a media player media library online radio broadcaster and mobile device management application developed by Apple. It is used to play download and organize digital audio and video on personal computers running the macOS and Microsoft Windows operating systems. The iTunes Store is also available on the iPod Touch iPhone and iPad. 273 Through the iTunes Store users can purchase and download music music videos television shows audiobooks podcasts movies and movie rentals in some countries and ringtones available on the iPhone and iPod Touch fourth generation onward. Application software for the iPhone iPad and iPod Touch can be downloaded from the App Store . 273 iPod Main article: iPod The first generation of iPod was released October 23 2001. The major innovation of the iPod was its small size achieved by using a 1.8 hard drive compared to the 2.5 drives common to players at that time. The capacity of the first-generation iPod ranged from 5 GB to 10 GB. 274 The iPod sold for US399 and more than 100 000 iPods were sold before the end of 2001. The introduction of the iPod resulted in Apple becoming a major player in the music industry. 275 Also the iPods success prepared the way for the iTunes music store and the iPhone. 276 After the first few generations of iPod Apple released the touchscreen iPod Touch the reduced-size iPod Mini and iPod Nano and the screenless iPod Shuffle in the following years. 275 iPhone Main article: iPhone Apple began work on the first iPhone in 2005 and the first iPhone was released on June 29 2007. The iPhone created such a sensation that a survey indicated six out of ten Americans were aware of its release. Time declared it Invention of the Year for 2007 and included it in the All-TIME 100 Gadgets list in 2010 in the category of Communication. 277 The completed iPhone had multimedia capabilities and functioned as a quad-band touch screen smartphone. A year later the iPhone 3G was released in July 2008 with three key features: support for GPS 3G data and tri-band UMTSHSDPA. In June 2009 the iPhone 3GS whose improvements included voice control a better camera and a faster processor was introduced by Phil Schiller. 278 The iPhone 4 was thinner than previous models had a five megapixel camera capable of recording video in 720p HD and added a secondary front-facing camera for video calls. 279 A major feature of the iPhone 4s introduced in October 2011 was Siri a virtual assistant capable of voice recognition. 280 iPad Main article: iPad Jobs introduced the iPad in 2010. The iPad is an iOS-based line of tablet computers designed and marketed by Apple. The first iPad was released on April 3 2010. The user interface is built around the devices multi-touch screen including a virtual keyboard . The iPad includes built-in Wi-Fi and cellular connectivity on select models. As of April 2015 update more than 250 million iPads have been sold. 281 Personal life Jobss house in Palo Alto Marriage In 1989 Jobs first met his future wife Laurene Powell when he gave a lecture at the Stanford Graduate School of Business where she was a student. Soon after the event he stated that Laurene was right there in the front row in the lecture hall and I couldnt take my eyes off of her ... kept losing my train of thought and started feeling a little giddy . 282 After the lecture he met her in the parking lot and invited her out to dinner. From that point forward they were together with a few minor exceptions for the rest of his life. 283 Jobs proposed on New Years Day 1990; they married on March 18 1991 in a Buddhist ceremony at the Ahwahnee Hotel in Yosemite National Park . 284 Fifty people including Jobss father Paul and his sister Mona attended. The ceremony was conducted by Jobss guru Kobun Chino Otogawa . 284 The vegan wedding cake was in the shape of Yosemites Half Dome and the wedding ended with a hike and Laurenes brothers snowball fight. Jobs reportedly said to Mona: You see Mona ... Laurene is descended from Joe Namath and were descended from John Muir . 285 Jobss and Powells first child a son named Reed was born in 1991. 286 Jobss father Paul died a year and a half later on March 5 1993. Jobss childhood home remains a tourist attraction and is currently owned by his stepmother Pauls second wife Marilyn Jobs. 287 Jobs and Powell had two more children daughters Erin b. 1995 and Eve Jobs b. 1998 who is a fashion model. 286 The family lived in Palo Alto California . 288 Although a billionaire Jobs made it known that like Gates he had stipulated that most of his monetary fortune would not be left to his children. 289 290 Both men had limited their childrens access age appropriate to social media computer games and the Internet. 291 292 Family Chrisann Brennan notes that after Jobs was forced out of Apple he apologized many times over for his behavior towards her and Lisa. She said Jobs said that he never took responsibility when he should have and that he was sorry . 293 By this time Jobs had developed a strong relationship with Lisa and when she was nine Jobs had her name on her birth certificate changed from Lisa Brennan to Lisa Brennan-Jobs . 8 Jobs and Brennan developed a working relationship to co-parent Lisa a change which Brennan credits to the influence of his newly found biological sister Mona Simpson who worked to repair the relationship between Lisa and Jobs. 8 Jobs had found Mona after first finding his birth mother Joanne Schieble Simpson shortly after he left Apple. 294 Jobs did not contact his birth family during his adoptive mother Claras lifetime however. He would later tell his official biographer Walter Isaacson : I never wanted Paul and Clara to feel like I didnt consider them my parents because they were totally my parents ... I loved them so much that I never wanted them to know of my search and I even had reporters keep it quiet when any of them found out . 294 However in 1986 when Jobs was 31 Clara was diagnosed with lung cancer. He began to spend a great deal of time with her and learned more details about her background and his adoption information that motivated him to find his biological mother. Jobs found on his birth certificate the name of the San Francisco doctor to whom Schieble had turned when she was pregnant. Although the doctor did not help Jobs while he was alive he left a letter for Jobs to be opened upon his death. As he died soon afterwards Jobs was given the letter which stated that his mother had been an unmarried graduate student from Wisconsin named Joanne Schieble . 294 Jobs only contacted Schieble after Clara died in early 1986 and after he received permission from his father Paul. In addition out of respect for Paul he asked the media not to report on his search. 294 Jobs stated that he was motivated to find his birth mother out of both curiosity and a need to see if she was okay and to thank her because Im glad I didnt end up as an abortion. She was twenty-three and she went through a lot to have me. 295 Schieble was emotional during their first meeting though she wasnt familiar with the history of Apple or Jobss role in it and told him that she had been pressured into signing the adoption papers. She said that she regretted giving him up and repeatedly apologized to him for it. Jobs and Schieble would develop a friendly relationship throughout the rest of his life and would spend Christmas together. 296 During this first visit Schieble told Jobs that he had a sister Mona who was not aware that she had a brother. 295 Schieble then arranged for them to meet in New York where Mona worked. Her first impression of Jobs was that he was totally straightforward and lovely just a normal and sweet guy . 297 Simpson and Jobs then went for a long walk to get to know each other. 297 Jobs later told his biographer that Mona was not completely thrilled at first to have me in her life and have her mother so emotionally affectionate toward me ... As we got to know each other we became really good friends and she is my family. I dont know what Id do without her. I cant imagine a better sister. My adopted sister Patty and I were never close. 297 I grew up as an only child with a single mother. Because we were poor and because I knew my father had emigrated from Syria I imagined he looked like Omar Sharif . I hoped he would be rich and kind and would come into our lives and our not-yet-furnished apartment and help us. Later after Id met my father I tried to believe hed changed his number and left no forwarding address because he was an idealistic revolutionary plotting a new world for the Arab people. Even as a feminist my whole life Id been waiting for a man to love who could love me. For decades Id thought that man would be my father. When I was 25 I met that man and he was my brother. Mona Simpson 219 Jobs then learned his family history. Six months after he was given up for adoption Schiebles father died she wed Jandali and they had a daughter Mona. 298 299 Jandali states that after finishing his PhD he returned to Syria to work and then Schieble left him. 298 They divorced in 1962 10 and he said then he lost contact with Mona for a time: I also bear the responsibility for being away from my daughter when she was four years old as her mother divorced me when I went to Syria but we got back in touch after 10 years. We lost touch again when her mother moved and I didnt know where she was but since 10 years ago weve been in constant contact and I see her three times a year. I organized a trip for her last year to visit Syria and Lebanon and she went with a relative from Florida. 298 A few years later Schieble married an ice-skating teacher George Simpson. Mona Jandali took her stepfathers last name as Mona Simpson. In 1970 after divorcing her second husband Schieble took Mona to Los Angeles and raised her alone. 299 When Simpson found that their father Abdulfattah Jandali was living in Sacramento California Jobs had no interest in meeting him as he believed Jandali did not treat his children well 300 and according to the San Francisco Chronicle this was because of finding a Seattle Times article about Jandalis abandonment of his students on a trip to Egypt in 1974. 301 Simpson went to Sacramento alone and met Jandali who worked in a small restaurant. They spoke for several hours and he told her that he had left teaching for the restaurant business. He said he and Schieble had given another child away for adoption but that well never see that baby again. That babys gone. He said he once managed a Mediterranean restaurant near San Jose and that all of the successful technology people used to come there. Even Steve Jobs ... oh yeah he used to come in and he was a sweet guy and a big tipper . At the request of Jobs Simpson did not reveal to Jandali that his own story meant that he had actually already met his son. 302 After hearing about the visit Jobs recalled that it was amazing ... I had been to that restaurant a few times and I remember meeting the owner. He was Syrian. Balding. We shook hands. However Jobs still did not want to meet Jandali because I was a wealthy man by then and I didnt trust him not to try to blackmail me or go to the press about it ... I asked Mona not to tell him about me . 302 Jandali later discovered his relationship to Jobs through an online blog. He then contacted Simpson and asked what is this thing about Steve Jobs? . Simpson told him that it was true and later commented My father is thoughtful and a beautiful storyteller but he is very very passive ... He never contacted Steve . Because Simpson herself researched her Syrian roots and began to meet the family she assumed that Jobs would eventually want to meet their father but he never did. Jobs also never showed an interest in his Syrian heritage or the Middle East. Simpson fictionalized the search for their father in her 1992 novel The Lost Father . 296 Malek Jandali is their cousin. 303 Philanthropy Jobss views and actions on philanthropy and charity are a public mystery. 304 He maintained privacy even over what few of these actions were publicly known. He has been a key figure in public discussions about societal obligations of the wealthy and powerful. Through his career the media investigated and criticized him and Apple as unusually and inexplicably mysterious or absent among powerful leaders and especially billionaires. His name is absent from the Million Dollar List of all large global philanthropy. 305 Some have speculated about his possible secret role in large anonymous donations. 304 Mark Vermilion former charitable leader for Joan Baez Apple and Jobs attributed Jobss lifelong minimization of direct charity to his perfectionism and limited time. Jobs Vermilion and supporters said over the years that corporate products were Jobss superior contributions to culture and society instead of direct charity. 305 In 1985 Jobs said You know my main reaction to this money thing is that its humorous all the attention to it because its hardly the most insightful or valuable thing thats happened to me. 304 Shortly after leaving Apple he formed the charitable Steven P. Jobs Foundation led by Mark Vermilion hired away from Apples community leadership. Jobs wanted a focus on nutrition and vegetarianism but Vermilion wanted social entrepreneurship. That year Jobs soon launched NeXT and closed the foundation with no results. Upon his 1997 return to Apple Jobs optimized the failing company to the core such as eliminating all philanthropic programs never to be restored. In 2007 Stanford Social Innovation Review magazine listed Apple among Americas least philanthropic companies . A few months after another unflattering news report Apple started a program to match employees charitable gifts. 305 Jobs declined to sign The Giving Pledge launched in 2010 by Warren Buffett and Bill Gates for fellow billionaires. 305 304 He donated 50 million to Stanford hospital and contributed to efforts to cure AIDS. Bono reported tens of millions of dollars given by Apple while Jobs was CEO to AIDS and HIV relief programs in Africa which inspired other companies to join. 305 Honors and awards Jobs received the National Medal of Technology from President Ronald Reagan in 1985 awarded jointly with Steve Wozniak . A statue of Jobs at Graphisoft Park in Budapest 306 1985 : awarded National Medal of Technology with Steve Wozniak by US President Ronald Reagan the countrys highest honor for technological achievements 307 1987 : Jefferson Award for Public Service 308 1989 : Entrepreneur of the Decade by Inc. 309 1991 : Howard Vollum Award from Reed College 310 20042010 : listed among the Time 100 Most Influential People in the World on five separate occasions 311 2007 : named the most powerful person in business by Fortune magazine 312 2007 : inducted into the California Hall of Fame located at The California Museum for History Women and the Arts 313 2012 : Grammy Trustees Award an award for those who have influenced the music industry in areas unrelated to performance 314 2012 : posthumously honored with an Edison Achievement Award for his commitment to innovation throughout his career 315 2013 : posthumously inducted as a Disney Legend 316 2017 : Steve Jobs Theater opens at Apple Park 317 2022 : posthumously awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by US President Joe Biden the countrys highest civilian honor 318 In popular culture Main article: List of depictions of Steve Jobs See also San Francisco Bay Area portal Seva Foundation Timeline of Steve Jobs media References Isaacson 2011 p. 4: Paul and Clara named their new baby Steven Paul Jobs. The Walt Disney Company and Affiliated CompaniesBoard of Directors . October 14 2009. Archived from the original on October 14 2009 . Retrieved September 18 2018 . Liedtke Michael October 5 2002. Steve Jobs resigns from Gaps board . The Berkeley Daily Planet . Archived from the original on November 14 2012 . Retrieved December 23 2011 . Steve Jobs Still Wins Plenty of Patents MIT Technology Review . MIT Technology Review . Archived from the original on January 20 2022 . Retrieved June 20 2022 . a b c Isaacson 2011 pp. 14. Brennan 2013 p. 15. Isaacson 2011 p. 14 . a b c Brennan 2013 . Shankland Stephen October 23 2011. Steve Jobs biography: A wealth of detail . CNET . Archived from the original on August 19 2019 . Retrieved August 19 2019 . a b c Isaacson 2011 p. 16. Brashares Ann 2001. Steve Jobs: Thinks Different . Lerner Publishing. p. 8. ISBN 978-0761-31393-9 . worked as a machinist Malone Michael S. 1999. Infinite Loop: How the Worlds Most Insanely Great Computer Company Went Insane . CurrencyDoubleday. ISBN 0-385-48684-7 . Archived from the original on August 7 2020 . Retrieved May 22 2020 . struggling as a machinist and then a used-car salesman .. finance company .. earned his realtors license. but downward spiral Isaacson 2011 p. 5. DeBolt Daniel October 7 2011. Steve Jobs called Mountain View home as a child . Mountain View Voice . Archived from the original on December 4 2019 . Retrieved January 22 2020 . Hatt remembers Jobs attending Monta Loma elementary school and according to county property records the Jobs family owned a house at 286 Diablo Avenue from 1959 to 1967. Isaacson 2011 pp. 56. a b Steve Jobs childhood home becomes a landmark . mercurynews.com . October 29 2013. Archived from the original on June 26 2015 . Retrieved June 26 2015 . Isaacson 2011 pp. 1213. Isaacson 2011 p. 13. Isaacson 2011 pp. 1314. Isaacson 2011 pp. 14. a b Steve Jobs old garage about to become a piece of history . mercurynews.com . September 27 2013. Archived from the original on June 26 2015 . Retrieved June 26 2015 . Steve Jobs II . Vimeo . Isaacson 2011 pp. xix 534. a b c Jason Hiner December 5 2014. Apples first employee: The remarkable odyssey of Bill Fernandez . TechRepublic . a b Isaacson 2011 p. 19. Isaacson 2011 pp. 2132. Isaacson 2011 p. 31. Brennan 2013 pp. 111. How Blue Box Phone Phreaking Put Steve Jobs and Woz on the Road to Apple . Esquire . October 15 2015. Archived from the original on December 16 2017 . Retrieved August 2 2022 . Steve Jobs and the Early Apple Years . The PC Is Born . Joomla. Archived from the original on July 18 2012 . Retrieved March 27 2012 . McBurney Sally Director 2013. Steve Jobs 1994 Uncut Interview with English Subtitles Video. Menlo Park California : Silicon Valley Historical Association. Isaacson 2011 p. 30. Steve Jobs Interview about the Blue Box Story . Silicon Valley Historical Association. January 19 2009. Archived from the original on April 2 2013 . Retrieved June 14 2015 via YouTube . a b McBurney Sally 2013. Steve Jobs: Visionary Entrepreneur Video. Menlo Park California : Silicon Valley Historical Association. Isaacson 2011 pp. 3132. Brennan Chrisann October 19 2011. Jobs at 17: Nerd Poet Romantic . Rolling Stone Magazine . Archived from the original on April 25 2012 . Retrieved February 9 2015 . Blumenthal Karen 2012. Steve Jobs The Man Who Thought Different . AC Black. ISBN 9781408832073 . pp.271272 Isaacson 2011 p. 33. Isaacson 2011 p. 37. Reed Magazine: Prodigal Son December 2011 The Atlantic: Playboy Releases 1985 Interview With 29-Year-Old Steve Jobs November 19 2010 Schlender 2016 p. 30. Isaacson 2011 pp. 4041. Naughton John October 8 2011. Steve Jobs: Stanford commencement address June 2005 . The Guardian . London. Archived from the original on February 11 2012. Schlender Brent November 9 1998. The Three Faces of Steve in this exclusive personal conversation Apples CEO reflects on the turnaround and on how a wunderkind became an old pro . Fortune . Archived from the original on April 8 2015 . Retrieved June 27 2015 . a b Isaacson 2011 pp. 4243. a b c An exclusive interview with Daniel Kottke . India Today . September 13 2011. Archived from the original on May 6 2012 . Retrieved October 27 2011 . How Steve Wozniaks Breakout Defined Apples Future . Gameinformer. June 27 2013. Archived from the original on November 1 2013 . Retrieved February 13 2014 . Cassidy on Nolan Bushnell: Steve was difficult says man who first hired Steve Jobs . Mercury News . March 29 2013. Archived from the original on December 6 2013 . Retrieved April 2 2013 . What really shaped Steve Jobss view of India Realms of intuition or the pains of Delhi belly? . Economic Times . India. September 25 2011. Archived from the original on April 30 2012 . Retrieved October 27 2011 . Il santone della Silicon Valley che ha conquistato i tecno-boss in Italian. Repubblica.it. June 9 2008. Archived from the original on May 8 2012 . Retrieved August 30 2011 . Wandering in India for 7 months: Steve Jobs . Yahoo News. October 24 2011. Archived from the original on June 19 2012 . Retrieved October 27 2011 . Andrews Amanda January 14 2009. Steve Jobs Apples iGod: Profile . The Daily Telegraph . UK. Archived from the original on April 13 2012 . Retrieved October 29 2009 . Steve Jobs profile: Apples hard core . Edinburgh: News scotsman. January 11 2009. Archived from the original on September 26 2011 . Retrieved October 29 2009 . Markoff John 2005. What the Dormouse Said: How the Sixties Counterculture Shaped the Personal Computer Industry . Penguin Books . p. preface xix. ISBN 978-0-14-303676-0 . Archived from the original on August 19 2020 . Retrieved October 5 2011 . Jobss Pentagon papers: kidnap fears drug use and a speeding ticket . The Sydney Morning Herald . Archived from the original on June 15 2012 . Retrieved June 12 2012 . Silberman Steve October 28 2011. What Kind of Buddhist was Steve Jobs Really? . NeuroTribes . Archived from the original on July 3 2012 . Retrieved December 29 2011 . Burke Daniel November 2 2011. Steve Jobs private spirituality now an open book . USA Today . Archived from the original on September 14 2012 . Retrieved December 29 2011 . Kentaro Saeki May 10 2020. The secret passion of Steve Jobs NHK WORLD-JAPAN News . NHK WORLD . NHK World-Japan . Archived from the original on March 14 2023 . Retrieved March 21 2023 . Isaacson 2011 pp. 5254. Smith 2020 pp. 286287. Kent Steven L. 2001. The Ultimate History of Video Games . Three Rivers. pp. 7173. ISBN 978-0-7615-3643-7 . Isaacson 2011 pp. 104107. a b Markoff John October 5 2011. Steven P. Jobs 19552011: Apples Visionary Redefined Digital Age . The New York Times . Archived from the original on December 19 2020 . Retrieved February 18 2017 . Heisler Yoni June 12 2012. Steve Jobs LSD habit why he indulged in Marijuana and his 1975 arrest . NETWORKWORLD . IDG Communications Inc. Archived from the original on September 5 2023 . Retrieved September 5 2023 . Zetter Kim. Steve Jobs Pentagon File: Blackmail Fears Youthful Arrest and LSD Cubes . WIRED . Archived from the original on September 5 2023 . Retrieved September 5 2023 . Young Jefferey S. December 1988. Steve Jobs: The Journey is the Reward . Lynx Books. p. 6. ISBN 155802378X . Linzmayer 2004 pp. 56. Linzmayer 2004 pp. 68. Linzmayer Owen W. Apple Confidential: The Real Story of Apple Computer Inc . The Denver Post . Archived from the original on April 14 2012. Simon Dan June 24 2010. The gambling man who co-founded Apple and left for 800 . CNN. Archived from the original on April 10 2014 . Retrieved June 24 2010 . How Did Apple Computer Get Its Brand Name? . Branding Strategy Insider. November 17 2011. Archived from the original on July 4 2017 . Retrieved November 6 2017 . Linzmayer pp. 57. Schlender 2016 pp. 3940. Isaacson 2011 pp. 6668. Linzmayer pp. 79. a b Williams Gregg; Moore Rob December 1984. The Apple Story Part 1: Early History . BYTE interview. p. A67 . Retrieved November 16 2019 . Markoff John September 1 1997. An Unknown Co-Founder Leaves After 20 Years of Glory and Turmoil . The New York Times . Archived from the original on January 2 2018 . Retrieved August 24 2011 . Done Deals: Venture Capitalists Tell Their Story: Featured HBS Arthur Rock . HBS Working Knowledge . Archived from the original on August 16 2019 . Retrieved June 23 2018 . Isaacson 2011 pp. 8183. Linzmayer 2004 p. 11. Young Jefferey S. December 1988. Steve Jobs: The Journey is the Reward . Lynx Books. p. 8. ISBN 155802378X . Linzmayer 2004 p. 12. a b Wozniak Steve. woz.org: Comment From e-mail: Why didnt the early Apple IIs use Fans? . woz.org. Archived from the original on December 26 2015 . Retrieved May 10 2015 . Wozniak Steve; Smith Gina 2006. iWoz: Computer Geek to Cult Icon: How I Invented the Personal Computer Co-Founded Apple and Had Fun Doing It . W. W. Norton Company . ISBN 0-393-06143-4 . OCLC 502898652 . a b Reimer Jeremy December 15 2005. Total share: 30 years of personal computer market share figures . Ars Technica . Conde Nast . Archived from the original on July 2 2012 . Retrieved May 25 2010 . Interview: Apple Employee No. 12 Dan Kottke on Companys Earliest Days and the College Steve Jobs . KQED November 25 2011. Edwards Jim December 26 2013. These Pictures of Apples First Employees Are Absolutely Wonderful . Business Insider . Archived from the original on July 31 2020 . Retrieved January 19 2015 . a b c Metz Rachel October 15 2013. Steve Jobs ex-girlfriend pens memoir on life with vicious Apple founder . The Guardian . Retrieved January 17 2015 . a b c Isaacson 2011 pp. 8889. Bullock Diane August 31 2010. The Kids of Business Icons: Lisa Brennan-Jobs . Minyanville . Archived from the original on September 4 2012 . Retrieved October 6 2011 . Isaacson 2011 p. 93. a b c Cocks Jay. Reported by Michael Moritz. The Updated Book of Jobs Archived February 9 2015 at the Wayback Machine in Machine of the Year: The Computer Moves in . Time January 3 1983:27. Machine of the Year: The Computer Moves in . Time January 3 1983 Young Jefferey S. December 1988. Steve Jobs: The Journey is the Reward . Lynx Books. p. 7. ISBN 155802378X . Photos: The Historic House Steve Jobs Demolished . Wired . February 17 2011. Archived from the original on June 3 2012 . Retrieved March 11 2017 . Isaacson 2011 pp. 386387. Lee Henry K. February 15 2011. Steve Jobs historic Woodside mansion is torn down . The San Francisco Chronicle . Archived from the original on December 25 2011 . Retrieved February 7 2022 . a b c Steve Wozniak on Newton Tesla and why the original Macintosh was a lousy product . June 27 2013. Archived from the original on March 12 2016 . Retrieved June 28 2013 . OGrady Jason D. 2009. Apple Inc . ABC-CLIO. ISBN 9780313362446 . pp. 810 Isaacson 2011 pp. 109112. Linzmayer 2004 pp. 110113. Isaacson 2011 pp. 167170. Schlender Brent; Tetzeli Rick 2016. Becoming Steve Jobs: The Evolution of a Reckless Upstart into a Visionary Leader . Crown Business; Reprint edition. ISBN 9780385347426 . pp.8283 Hertzfeld Andy . The Times They Are A-Changin . folklore.org. Archived from the original on February 5 2012. Kahney Leander January 6 2004. Wired News: Were All Mac Users Now . Wired News . Archived from the original on January 4 2014 . Retrieved September 20 2006 . Americas Most Admired Companies: Jobs journey timeline . Fortune . Archived from the original on April 10 2014 . Retrieved May 24 2010 . Jobs and a team of engineers visit Xerox PARC where they see a demo of mouse and graphical user interface a b c Isaacson 2011 pp. 185187. a b c Schlender 2016 pp. 8488. Linzmayer 2004 p. 98. Robbeloth DeWitt OctoberNovember 1985. Whither Apple? . II Computing . p. 8 . Retrieved January 28 2015 . Rice Valerie April 15 1985. Unrecognized Apple II Employees Exit . InfoWorld . p. 35. Archived from the original on May 14 2021 . Retrieved February 4 2015 . Bunnell David April 30 2010. Chapter 10: Steve Thumbs his Nose at the Apple II . My Close Encounters With Steve Jobs . Archived from the original on July 19 2019 . Retrieved November 12 2019 via Cult of Mac. I Never Left Apple . Woz.org . January 3 2018. Archived from the original on March 27 2019 . Retrieved November 12 2019 . Krishnamoorthy Anand; Li Susan October 6 2011. Jobss Death Was Like Lennon JFK Getting Shot Wozniak Says . Bloomberg Businessweek . Archived from the original on November 12 2019 . Retrieved November 12 2019 . When Steve Jobs Got Fired by Apple . ABC News . Gallagher William September 12 2019. Looking back at Steve Jobss NeXT Inc the most successful failure ever . AppleInsider . Retrieved July 12 2022 . a b c d e f Swaine Michael and Paul Freiberger. Fire in the Valley: The Birth and Death of the Personal Computer 3rd Edition Dallas: Pragmatic Bookshelf 2014 Spector G September 24 1985. Apples Jobs Starts New Firm Targets Education Market . PC Week . p. 109. Linzmayer 2004 p. 208. Schwartz John October 24 1988. Steve Jobs Comes Back . Newsweek . Palo Alto California. p. Business. Archived from the original on October 14 2014 . Retrieved October 20 2014 . NeXT Timeline . Archived from the original on February 3 2015 . Retrieved January 21 2015 . Schlender Brenton R. October 13 1988. Next Project: Apple Era Behind Him Steve Jobs Tries Again Using a New System . The Wall Street Journal Western ed.. Palo Alto California: Dow Jones Company Inc . p. Front Page Leader. Archived from the original on October 20 2014 . Retrieved October 20 2014 . Rose F. April 23 2009. Rose Frank August 24 2011. The End of Innocence at Apple: What Happened After Steve Jobs was Fired . Wired . Archived from the original on October 8 2011 . Retrieved March 11 2017 . . Wired . Welcome to info.cern.ch: The website of the worlds first-ever web server . CERN European Organization for Nuclear Research. 2008. Archived from the original on January 17 2010 . Retrieved November 1 2011 . Computimes . May 31 1990. Interpersonal computing the third revolution? Archived April 29 2016 at the Wayback Machine . New Straits Times . 230 20; Schlender B. R. Alpert M. February 12 1990. Schlender Brenton R. February 12 1990. Whos ahead in the computer wars . CNN . Archived from the original on November 29 2020 . Retrieved August 3 2020 . . Fortune . Stross R. E. 1993. Steve Jobs and the NeXT Big Thing . Atheneum. ISBN 978-0-689-12135-7 . pp. 117 120 246. a b OGrady J. 2008. Apple Inc. Greenwood Press. ISBN 978-0-313-36244-6 . pages needed Linzmayer 2004 p. 213. Langer Andy September 10 2014. Is Steve Jobs the God of Music? . Esquire . Hearst Communications . Retrieved July 10 2017 . Smith Alvy Ray . Pixar Founding Documents . Alvy Ray Smith Homepage . Archived from the original on April 27 2005 . Retrieved January 11 2011 . Bates James October 24 1995. Steve Jobs to Get Executive Producer Credit on Disney Animated Film . Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on September 28 2022 . Retrieved September 28 2022 . Pixars Brave Honors Steve Jobs . The Hollywood Reporter . May 25 2012. Archived from the original on February 14 2021 . Retrieved February 8 2021 . Hill Jim February 5 2012. Steve Jobs bio reveals how Michael Eisner actively tried to derail Disneys 2006 acquisition of Pixar . Jim Hill Media. Archived from the original on June 27 2012 . Retrieved February 10 2012 . McClintock Pamela February 24 2013. Oscars 2013: Brenda Chapmans Brave Win a Vindication After Being Fired From the Project . The Hollywood Reporter . Archived from the original on April 20 2021 . Retrieved May 1 2021 . Wolff Michael iPod Therefore I am . Vanity Fair . October 10 2006. Archived from the original on March 28 2014. Vanity Fair April 2006. Retrieved September 3 2010. a b c Iger Robert September 18 2019. We Could Say Anything to Each Other: Bob Iger Remembers Steve Jobs . Vanity Fair . Archived from the original on March 10 2021 . Retrieved February 7 2022 . a b January 25 2006 Disney buys Pixar for 7.4 bn . Archived from the original on November 9 2013. rediff.com The Walt Disney Company Steve Jobs Biography . Archived from the original on April 26 2012 . Retrieved June 22 2008 . Holson Laura M. January 25 2006. Disney Agrees to Acquire Pixar in a 7.4 Billion Deal . The New York Times . Archived from the original on October 9 2011 . Retrieved January 17 2010 . Pixar Becomes Unit of Disney . The New York Times . Associated Press . May 6 2006. Archived from the original on April 23 2011 . Retrieved January 17 2010 . Steve Jobs 19552011 . Splashnogly. October 6 2011. Archived from the original on April 23 2012 . Retrieved January 15 2012 . Jobss 7.7 Disney Stake Transfers to Trust Led by Widow Laurene . Bloomberg . Archived from the original on April 10 2014. Norman Floyd January 19 2009. Steve Jobs: A Tough Act to Follow . Jim Hill Media. Archived from the original on May 8 2010 . Retrieved January 19 2009 . a b Bort Julie June 5 2014. Steve Jobs Taught This Man How To Win Arguments With Really Stubborn People . Inc . Monsueto Ventures. Archived from the original on June 8 2014 . Retrieved June 8 2014 . WIRED Staff. Apple Buyout of Be Appears Unlikely . Wired . ISSN 1059-1028 . Archived from the original on November 5 2023 . Retrieved November 5 2023 . Software Deal Turns Up Heat On Apple The Spokesman-Review . www.spokesman.com . Archived from the original on November 5 2023 . Retrieved November 5 2023 . Markoff John December 23 1996. Why Apple Sees Next as a Match Made in Heaven . The New York Times . ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on November 5 2023 . Retrieved November 5 2023 . Kawamoto Dawn December 20 1996. Apple acquires Next Jobs . CNET . Archived from the original on June 6 2022 . Retrieved October 26 2022 . Apple Formally Names Jobs as Interim Chief . The New York Times . September 17 1997. Archived from the original on November 17 2017 . Retrieved June 27 2011 . The once and future Steve Jobs . Salon.com . October 11 2000. Archived from the original on April 16 2009. Norr Henry January 6 2000. MacWorld ExpoPermanent JobsApple CEO finally drops interim from title . San Francisco Chronicle . Archived from the original on November 2 2011 . Retrieved June 27 2011 . Jobs announces new MacOS becomes iCEO . CNN . January 5 2000. Archived from the original on August 20 2013. Levy Steven 1995. Insanely Great: The Life and Times of Macintosh the Computer That Changed Everything . Penguin Books . p. 312. ISBN 978-0-14-023237-0 . Archived from the original on August 20 2020 . Retrieved May 6 2020 . If Apple can go home again why not Dell? . Archived from the original on August 26 2012 . Retrieved January 5 2009 . CNET News. May 19 2008. Dell: Apple should close shop . CNET . Archived from the original on May 17 2008. Markoff John January 16 2006. Michael Dell Should Eat His Words Apple Chief Suggests . The New York Times . Archived from the original on June 4 2012 . Retrieved May 24 2010 . 11 Presentation Lessons You Can Still Learn From Steve Jobs . Forbes . May 28 2014. Archived from the original on June 5 2014 . Retrieved June 16 2014 . a b Steve Jobs black turtleneck reportedly explained in biography . Los Angeles Times . October 11 2011. Archived from the original on October 28 2011 . Retrieved October 14 2011 . Wear the Exact Outfit of Steve Jobs for 458 . Gizmodo . February 28 2006. Archived from the original on July 11 2011 . Retrieved April 19 2010 . New questions raised about Steve Jobss role in Apple stock options scandal . December 28 2006. Archived from the original on May 9 2007. Apple restates acknowledges faked documents . EE Times . December 29 2006. Archived from the original on May 21 2013 . Retrieved January 1 2007 . Live Jobs Tells Stanford Grads . Wired . June 13 2005. ISSN 1059-1028 . Retrieved July 31 2024 . Apple Improves Recycling Plan . PC Magazine . April 21 2006. Archived from the original on October 20 2008. Bilton Nick August 9 2011. Apple Is the Most Valuable Company . The New York Times . Archived from the original on February 25 2012 . Retrieved February 24 2012 . 7.30 . ABCnet.au. October 6 2011. Archived from the original on October 8 2011 . Retrieved November 12 2011 . Lateline : Visionary Steve Jobs succumbs to cancer . ABCnet.au. October 6 2011. Archived from the original on October 8 2011 . Retrieved November 12 2011 . Live from Macworld 2007: Steve Jobs keynote . 2007. Archived from the original on June 26 2012 . Retrieved April 19 2010 . Group Wants 7B USD From Apple Steve Jobs Executives Over Securities Fraud . Archived from the original on February 1 2012 . Retrieved July 2 2008 . Apple Steve Jobs Executives Board Sued For Securities Fraud . Archived from the original on May 19 2009. a b Ross Andrew S. November 1 2011. Steve Jobs bio sheds light on Obama relationship . San Francisco Chronicle . Archived from the original on November 4 2011 . Retrieved November 12 2011 . a b c d Evangelista Benny August 2 2004. Apples Jobs has cancerous tumor removed . San Francisco Chronicle . p. A1. Archived from the original on August 18 2006 . Retrieved August 9 2006 . Steve Jobs and the Celebrity Diagnosis Complete Guide to Tumors of the Pancreas . Celebrity Diagnosis. October 6 2011. Archived from the original on June 26 2012 . Retrieved November 12 2011 . Elkind Peter March 5 2008. The trouble with Steve Jobs . Fortune . Archived from the original on April 21 2010 . Retrieved March 5 2008 . Fiore Kristina December 28 2012. Jobs Leaves Lessons for Cancer Care . MedPage Today . Archived from the original on April 10 2014 . Retrieved July 14 2013 . Gorski David October 31 2011. And one more thing about Steve Jobs battle with cancer . Science-Based Medicine . Archived from the original on May 11 2020 . Retrieved October 9 2020 . Physician Biography for Barrie R. Cassileth . Archived November 13 2011 at the Wayback Machine Szabo Liz June 18 2013. Book raises alarms about alternative medicine . USA Today . Archived from the original on June 18 2013 . Retrieved June 19 2013 . Potter Ned October 20 2011. Steve Jobs Regretted Delaying Cancer Surgery 9 Months Biographer Says . ABC News . Archived from the original on April 10 2014. Metz Rachel; Ortutay Barbara; Robertson Jordan; Writers AP Technology. Jobs questioned authority all his life book says Update . phys.org . Archived from the original on October 23 2022 . Retrieved October 23 2022 . Steve Jobs chose herbal medicine delayed cancer surgery . Archived from the original on October 23 2022 . Retrieved October 23 2022 . Pancreatic Cancer Treatment . Mayo Clinic. Archived from the original on January 19 2012 . Retrieved April 19 2010 . Markoff John July 23 2008. Talk of Chiefs Health Weighs on Apples Share Price . The New York Times . Archived from the original on March 18 2017 . Retrieved February 18 2017 . a b Elmer Philip June 13 2008. Steve Jobs and Whipple . Fortune . Archived from the original on June 11 2009 . Retrieved April 19 2010 . Kahney Leander August 8 2006. Has Steve Jobs Lost His Magic? . Cult of Mac. Wired News . Archived from the original on January 12 2012 . Retrieved August 8 2006 . Looking very thin almost gaunt Jobs used the 90-minute presentation to introduce a new desktop Mac and preview the next version of Apples operating system code-named Leopard. Meyers Michelle. Jobs speech wasnt very Jobs-like . BLOGMA . CNET News.com . Archived from the original on December 25 2007 . Retrieved August 8 2006 . The audience was uninspired and concerned by Jobss relatively listless delivery Saracevic Al August 9 2006. Wheres Jobs Mojo? . San Francisco Chronicle . p. C1. Archived from the original on January 28 2012 . Retrieved August 9 2006 . Cheng Jacqui August 8 2006. What happened to The Steve we know and love? . Ars Technica . Archived from the original on January 22 2009 . Retrieved August 8 2006 . Claburn Thomas August 11 2006. Steve Jobs Lives! . InformationWeek . Archived from the original on January 24 2012 . Retrieved October 9 2007 . Business Technology: Steve Jobss Appearance Grabs Notice Not Just the IPhone . The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on April 26 2009 . Retrieved April 19 2010 . Apple says Steve Jobs feeling a little under the weather . June 10 2008. Archived from the original on April 10 2014. in AppleInsider . Steve Jobs and Apple . Archived from the original on April 10 2014. Marketing Doctor Blog. July 24 2008. Steve Jobs Did Not Have Pancreatic Cancer . Medpagetoday.com. January 24 2011. Archived from the original on January 20 2012 . Retrieved November 12 2011 . Nocera Joe July 26 2008. Apples Culture of Secrecy . The New York Times . Archived from the original on March 5 2017 . Retrieved February 18 2017 . While his health problems amounted to a good deal more than a common bug they werent life-threatening and he doesnt have a recurrence of cancer. Tate Ryan August 27 2008 Steve Jobss Obituary As Run By Bloomberg Gawker archived from the original on November 19 2022 retrieved October 11 2022 Bloomberg publishes Jobs obit but why? . Zdnet Blogs . ZDnet . August 28 2008. Archived from the original on August 31 2008 . Retrieved August 29 2008 . Mikkelson Barbara September 26 2007. And Never The Twain Shall Tweet . Snopes.com . Archived from the original on November 8 2021 . Retrieved November 2 2012 . Apple posts Lets Rock event video . Macworld . September 10 2008. Archived from the original on January 5 2012 . Retrieved September 11 2008 . Live from Apples spotlight turns to notebooks event . Engadget . October 14 2008. Archived from the original on April 16 2012 . Retrieved October 14 2008 . Stone Brad December 17 2008. Apples Chief to Skip Macworld Fueling Speculation . The New York Times . Archived from the original on December 6 2011 . Retrieved May 24 2010 . Steve Jobs Health Declining Rapidly Reason for Macworld Cancellation . Gizmodo . December 30 2008. Archived from the original on October 22 2012 . Retrieved April 19 2010 . Apples Jobs admits poor health . BBC News . January 5 2009. Archived from the original on August 25 2011 . Retrieved January 5 2009 . Jobs Steve January 5 2009. Letter from Apple CEO Steve Jobs Press release. Apple Inc. Archived from the original on June 23 2011 . Retrieved January 20 2009 . a b Apple Media Advisory Press release. Apple Inc. January 14 2009. Archived from the original on May 21 2011 . Retrieved January 14 2009 . I BEG YOU mighty Jobs TAKE MY LIVER Cook told Apples dying co-founder . The Register . March 13 2015. Archived from the original on August 16 2017 . Retrieved August 22 2017 . a b Steve Jobs recovering after liver transplant . CNN. June 23 2009. Archived from the original on March 31 2014 . Retrieved April 19 2010 . Liver Transplant in Memphis: Jobs was Sickest Patient on Waiting List . Celebrity Diagnosis. June 24 2009. Archived from the original on June 26 2012. Grady Denise; Meier Barry June 22 2009. A Transplant That Is Raising Many Questions . The New York Times . Archived from the original on April 22 2017 . Retrieved February 18 2017 . Helft Miguel January 17 2010. Apple Says Steve Jobs Will Take a New Medical Leave . The New York Times . Archived from the original on March 18 2017 . Retrieved January 17 2010 . Steve Jobs to take medical leave of absence but remain Apple CEO . January 17 2011. Archived from the original on January 24 2012. Abell John June 8 2011. Video: Jobs Pitches New Mothership to Approving Cupertino City Council . Wired . Archived from the original on January 14 2012 . Retrieved June 9 2011 . Letter from Steve Jobs To the Apple Board of Directors and the Apple Community resignation letter August 24 2011 Archived April 14 2012 at the Wayback Machine Apple Resignation Letter Press release. Apple Inc. Archived from the original on April 14 2012 . Retrieved August 29 2011 . Steve Jobs Resigns as CEO of Apple Press release. Apple Inc. August 24 2011. Archived from the original on April 14 2012 . Retrieved August 24 2011 . Biddle Sam October 19 2011. Steve Jobs Worked the Day Before He Died . Gizmodo . Archived from the original on June 15 2012 . Retrieved October 21 2011 . Gupta Poornima August 18 2011. Steve Jobs Quits . Reuters . Archived from the original on February 1 2012 . Retrieved August 25 2011 . Siegler M.G. August 24 2011. Steve Jobs Resigns As CEO of Apple . TechCrunch . Archived from the original on August 24 2011 . Retrieved August 25 2011 . Rare Pancreatic Cancer Caused Steve Jobs Death Press release. Voice of America. October 7 2011. Archived from the original on January 24 2012 . Retrieved October 7 2011 . Rushe Dominic October 6 2011. Steve Jobs Apple co-founder dies at 56 . The Guardian . UK. Archived from the original on June 19 2013. Gullo Karen October 10 2011. Steve Jobs Died at Home of Respiratory Arrest Related to Pancreatic Cancer . Bloomberg L.P . Archived from the original on December 30 2011 . Retrieved February 10 2012 . a b c d Simpson Mona October 30 2011. A Sisters Eulogy for Steve Jobs . The New York Times . Archived from the original on September 5 2012 . Retrieved October 30 2011 . Sherr Ian; Fowler Geoffrey A. October 7 2011. Steve Jobs Funeral Is Friday . The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on August 13 2013. Cook Tim October 5 2011. Statement by Apples Board of Directors Press release. Apple Inc. Archived from the original on April 28 2012 . Retrieved October 5 2011 . Pixar Animation Studios . Pixar. Archived from the original on June 8 2012 . Retrieved April 18 2013 . Remembering Steve Jobs . Apple Inc. Archived from the original on June 16 2012 . Retrieved October 10 2011 . Apple flies flags at half staff for Steve Jobs . KOKI-TV . October 6 2011. Archived from the original on August 13 2013 . Retrieved October 29 2011 . Microsoft lowers flags to half staff in tribute to Steve Jobs . Network World . October 6 2011. Archived from the original on November 9 2013 . Retrieved October 29 2011 . Disney World flags at half-staff in memory of Steve Jobs . Bay News 9 . October 6 2011. Archived from the original on December 13 2011 . Retrieved October 29 2011 . Pepitone Julianne October 6 2011. Steve Jobs: The homepage tributes . CNN . Archived from the original on June 9 2012 . Retrieved January 10 2012 . Apple website pays tribute to Steve Jobs . The Times of India . India. October 5 2011. Archived from the original on April 3 2012 . Retrieved October 7 2011 . Remembering Steve Jobs . Apple Inc. Archived from the original on June 16 2012 . Retrieved October 6 2011 . A Celebration of Steves Life . Archived from the original on December 29 2013 . Retrieved October 26 2011 . Fernandez Sofia M. October 14 2011. Private Steve Jobs Memorial Set for Oct. 16 The Hollywood Reporter . The Hollywood Reporter . Archived from the original on December 31 2013 . Retrieved November 12 2011 . Steve Jobs Memorial Service To Be Held Oct. 16 . The Wall Street Journal . October 15 2011. Archived from the original on August 13 2013 . Retrieved November 12 2011 . Vascellaro Jessica E. October 17 2011. Steve Jobss Family Gave Moving Words at Sunday Memorial Digits WSJ . The Wall Street Journal . Archived from the original on April 10 2014 . Retrieved November 12 2011 . Wadhwa Hitendra June 21 2015. Steve Jobss Secret to Greatness: Yogananda . Inc. Archived from the original on June 22 2015 . Retrieved June 23 2015 . Wozniak Tearfully Remembers His Friend Steve Jobs . YouTube . October 6 2011. Archived from the original on December 19 2021. Sellers Patricia October 6 2011. George Lucas on Steve Jobs . Fortune . Archived from the original on March 7 2012 . Retrieved October 6 2011 . Remembering Steve Jobs . gatesnotes.com. October 6 2011. Archived from the original on May 16 2022 . Retrieved June 9 2022 . Statement by the President on the Passing of Steve Jobs . whitehouse.gov Press release. October 5 2011. Archived from the original on February 10 2021 via National Archives . Steve Jobs Died of Respiratory Arrest Amid Pancreatic Tumor . ABC News . October 10 2011. Archived from the original on January 22 2012 . Retrieved November 12 2011 . Gupta Poornima October 10 2011. Steve Jobs died of respiratory arrest tumor . Reuters . Archived from the original on April 10 2014 . Retrieved September 21 2012 . a b Steve Jobs autobiography: a chronicle of a complex genius . The Hindu . Chennai India. October 24 2011. Archived from the original on November 9 2013. Shontell Alyson. This Man Could Have Made 30 Million Per Year As Apples Designer But He Turned Steve Jobs Down . Business Insider . Archived from the original on May 17 2019 . Retrieved May 17 2019 . What Made Steve Jobs So Great? . Fast Company . August 24 2011. Archived from the original on April 10 2014 . Retrieved August 21 2012 . a b Does Steve Jobs know how to code? . Archived from the original on October 31 2013 . Retrieved August 21 2012 . Searching for Magic in India and Silicon Valley: An Interview with Daniel Kottke Apple Employee 12 . Boing Boing . August 9 2012. Archived from the original on January 11 2014 . Retrieved August 30 2012 . Portfolio of over 300 patents underscores Steve Jobs attention to detail . August 25 2011. Archived from the original on April 10 2014 . Retrieved September 26 2012 . a b U.S. Government patent database . Archived from the original on August 12 2013 . Retrieved August 29 2011 . U.S. Government patent application database . Archived from the original on December 26 2015 . Retrieved August 29 2011 . United States Patent 8 032 843 Ording et al. October 4 2011 User interface for providing consolidation and access . Archived from the original on August 12 2013 . Retrieved November 21 2017 . Steve Jobs Told Me Why He Loved Being A CEO . Business Insider . Archived from the original on August 7 2011 . Retrieved February 2 2013 . He told me once that part of the reason he wanted to be CEO was so that nobody could tell him that he wasnt allowed to participate in the nitty-gritty of product design ... He was right there in the middle of it. All of it. As a team member not as CEO. He quietly left his CEO hat by the door and collaborated with us. Kachka Boris August 26 2015. How Kate Winslet Won a Role in Steve Jobs and Managed All That Sorkin Dialogue . Vulture . Archived from the original on June 18 2016 . Retrieved December 28 2017 . Rosenwald Michael S. October 24 2011. Walter Isaacsons Steve Jobs biography shows Apple co-founders genius flaws . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on October 25 2012 . Retrieved September 16 2012 . Isaacson 2011 pp. 7383. June 10 1978 - Apple II Released Today . This Day in History . Mountain View CA: Computer History Museum. Archived from the original on June 20 2012 . Retrieved August 3 2012 . Weyhrich Steven December 2008. 4-The Apple II cont. - Product Introduction . Apple II History . Apple2History.org. Archived from the original on July 22 2011 . Retrieved August 3 2012 . The first motherboard-only Apple II computers shipped on May 10 1977 for those who wanted to add their own case keyboard and power supply or wanted to update their Apple-1 system with the latest and greatest. A month later on June 10 1977 Apple began shipping full Apple II systems. Dernbach Christoph October 12 2007. Apple Lisa . Mac History. Archived from the original on November 3 2012 . Retrieved November 15 2012 . Apple Lisa computer . Archived from the original on June 2 2015 . Retrieved May 20 2015 . Simon Jeffrey S.; Young William L. April 14 2006. iCon: Steve Jobs the greatest second act in the history of business Newly updated ed.. Hoboken NJ: Wiley . p. 70 . ISBN 978-0471787846 . Linzmayer 2004 p. 79. Polsson Ken July 29 2009. Chronology of Apple Computer Personal Computers . Archived from the original on August 21 2009 . Retrieved August 27 2009 . Linzmayer 2004 p. 113. Maney Kevin January 28 2004. Apples 1984 Super Bowl commercial still stands as watershed event . USA Today . Archived from the original on April 5 2016 . Retrieved April 11 2010 . Leopold Todd February 3 2006. Why 2006 isnt like 1984 . CNN . Archived from the original on April 5 2016 . Retrieved May 10 2008 . Creamer Matthew March 1 2012. Apples First Marketing Guru on Why 1984 Is Overrated . Ad Age . Archived from the original on April 19 2015 . Retrieved April 19 2015 . Cellini Adelia January 2004. The Story Behind Apples 1984 TV commercial: Big Brother at 20 . MacWorld . Vol. 1 no. 21. p. 18. Archived from the original on June 28 2009 . Retrieved May 9 2008 . Long Tony January 22 2007. Jan. 22 1984: Dawn of the Mac . Wired . Archived from the original on April 16 2010 . Retrieved April 11 2010 . Reimer Jeremy December 14 2005. Total share: 30 years of personal computer market share figures . Ars Technica . Archived from the original on May 14 2021 . Retrieved April 16 2015 . Carter Mia. Steve Jobs: 10 Products that Define this Tech Legend . Inventions and Discoveries . Archived from the original on November 30 2011 . Retrieved March 27 2012 . Steve Jobs Introduces NeXTComputer . Archived from the original on May 18 2013 . Retrieved April 7 2013 . Steve Jobs unveiled the NeXT the computer he designed after moving on from Apple Computer Inc... Hoppel Adrian. Magical Inventions of Steve Jobs . Best Inventions of Steve Jobs . Magical Inventions of Steve Jobs. Archived from the original on April 10 2014 . Retrieved March 27 2012 . Antonelli Paola April 2006. iMac 1998 . MetropolisMag. Archived from the original on May 11 2013 . Retrieved March 28 2012 . Michael August 7 2007. Apple History: Evolution of the iMac . Apple Gazette . Archived from the original on November 16 2012 . Retrieved March 28 2012 . a b McElhearn Kirk January 9 2016. 15 years of iTunes: A look at Apples media app and its influence on an industry . Macworld . International Data Group . Archived from the original on December 17 2017 . Retrieved December 16 2017 . iPod First Generation . iPod History . Archived from the original on June 27 2012 . Retrieved March 28 2012 . a b Block Ryan September 8 2005. The iPod family cemetery . iPods . EndGadget. Archived from the original on December 6 2012 . Retrieved March 28 2012 . Asiado Tel August 24 2011. Steve Jobs: 10 Products that Define this Tech Legend . Inventions and Discoveries . Archived from the original on November 30 2011 . Retrieved March 27 2012 . Ha Peter October 25 2010. All-TIME 100 Gadgets - TIME . Time . ISSN 0040-781X . Archived from the original on August 2 2021 . Retrieved October 9 2021 . iPhone 3GS . iPhone News . iPhoneHistory. Archived from the original on June 24 2012 . Retrieved March 28 2012 . iPhone 4 Tech Specs . Apple. Archived from the original on June 30 2012 . Retrieved March 28 2012 . iPhone History Read About The iPhone Story Here . The Apple Biters Blog. November 4 2011. Archived from the original on June 21 2012 . Retrieved October 15 2014 . The iPads 5th anniversary: a timeline of Apples category-defining tablet . The Verge . April 3 2015. Archived from the original on April 17 2015 . Retrieved April 17 2015 . Love Dylan. Steve Jobs Skipped A Business Meeting To Take His Wife On Their First Date . Business Insider . Retrieved June 30 2020 . Milian Mark October 6 2011. The spiritual side of Steve Jobs CNN Business . CNN . Retrieved May 2 2024 . a b Elkind Peter March 5 2008. Americas Most Admired Companies: Steve Jobs pg 2 . CNNMoney . Archived from the original on March 5 2010 . Retrieved September 17 2013 . Isaacson 2011 p. 274. a b Linzmayer 2004 p. 81. Steve Jobs Childhood Home Draws Tourists; Stepmom Laments Resignation . Los Altos CA Patch . August 25 2011. Archived from the original on June 2 2021 . Retrieved May 30 2021 . Laurene Powell Jobs PARSA . PARSA Community Foundation. 2006. Archived from the original on September 14 2010 . Retrieved July 8 2008 . Gelles David February 27 2020. Laurene Powell Jobs Is Putting Her Own Dent in the Universe: An interview with the 35th-richest person in the world . The New York Times . Archived from the original on May 25 2020 . Retrieved May 25 2020 . Hartmans Avery February 28 2020. Laurene Powell Jobs says she wont pass on billions to her children . Business Insider . Archived from the original on June 29 2020 . Retrieved May 25 2020 . It ends with me Schwartz Jonathan Spring 1979. Reclaiming happiness in the digital age . Jewish Action OU . pp. 6872. Archived from the original on January 20 2021 . Retrieved May 25 2020 . Both Bill Gates and Steve Jobs ... raised their children with serious limits on their Internet social media and gaming access. Akhtar Allana; Ward Marguerite May 15 2020. Bill Gates and Steve Jobs raised their kids with limited tech and it should have been a red flag about our own smartphone use . Business Insider . Archived from the original on May 14 2020 . Retrieved May 25 2020 . Brennan 2013 p. 220. a b c d Isaacson 2011 pp. 253255. a b Isaacson 2011 p. 254. a b Isaacson 2011 p. 258. a b c Isaacson 2011 p. 255. a b c The father of invention . Saudi Gazette . January 18 2011. Archived from the original on July 1 2015 . Retrieved June 27 2015 . a b Isaacson 2011 p. 253. Isaacson 2011 p. 256. Graff Amy November 18 2015. Social media reminds us Steve Jobs was the son of a Syrian migrant . SFGate . Hearst Communications. Archived from the original on May 19 2016 . Retrieved May 19 2016 . a b Isaacson 2011 p. 257. Conversations: Malek Jandali Mona Simpson James Gelvin Archived April 14 2018 at the Wayback Machine UCLA Hammer Museum event. Hammer.UCLA.edu . Retrieved October 2 2018. a b c d Sorkin Andrew Ross August 29 2011. The Mystery of Steve Jobss Public Giving . The New York Times . Archived from the original on August 6 2022 . Retrieved August 6 2022 . a b c d e Whoriskey Peter October 6 2011. Record thin on Steve Jobs philanthropy . The Washington Post . Archived from the original on August 12 2022 . Retrieved August 6 2022 . Steve Jobs statue unveiled in Hungary science park . GlobalPost . December 21 2011. Archived from the original on January 10 2012 . Retrieved December 28 2011 . The National Medal of Technology Recipients 1985 Laureates . Uspto.gov. Archived from the original on August 26 2009 . Retrieved April 19 2010 . National Winners public service awards . Jefferson Awards.org. Archived from the original on February 20 2012 . Retrieved April 19 2010 . Burlingham Bo; Gendron George April 1 1989. The Entrepreneur of the Decade . Inc. magazine . Archived from the original on June 9 2012 . Retrieved October 8 2011 . Reed College Convocation . Apple iTunes . Portland Oregon: Reed College. August 27 1991. Archived from the original on December 11 2016 . Retrieved December 6 2016 . Caldwell Serenity April 29 2010. Steve Jobs makes Time 100 for fifth time . Macworld . Archived from the original on September 20 2022 . Retrieved September 20 2022 . 25 most powerful people in business 1: Steve Jobs . Fortune . Archived from the original on April 10 2014 . Retrieved April 19 2010 . Jobs inducted into California Hall of Fame . Archived from the original on January 10 2008. California Museum . Retrieved 2007. Arico Joe December 22 2011. Steve Jobs Wins Special Grammy . Mobiledia.com . Archived from the original on September 6 2012 . Retrieved December 28 2011 . 2012 EDISON AWARDS WINNERS ANNOUNCED PDF . p. 1. Archived PDF from the original on October 21 2021 . Retrieved October 19 2021 . Ford Rebecca July 10 2013. Steve Jobs Billy Crystal to Receive Disney Legends Awards . The Hollywood Reporter . Archived from the original on April 4 2014 . Retrieved July 18 2013 . Apple Parks Steve Jobs Theater opens to host 2017 keynote . Dezeen . September 12 2017. Archived from the original on January 5 2018 . Retrieved January 4 2018 . Steve Jobs awarded posthumous Medal of Freedom by President Biden . MSN . p. 1. Archived from the original on July 1 2022 . Retrieved July 1 2022 . Bibliography Brennan Chrisann 2013. The Bite in the Apple: A Memoir of My Life with Steve Jobs . New York: St. Martins Press . ISBN 978-1-250-03876-0 . Isaacson Walter 2011. Steve Jobs 1st ed.. New York: Simon Schuster . ISBN 978-1-4516-4853-9 . Linzmayer Owen W. 2004. Apple Confidential 2.0: The Definitive History of the Worlds Most Colorful Company . No Starch Press . ISBN 978-1-59327-010-0 . Schlender Brent; Tetzeli Rick 2015. Becoming Steve Jobs: The Evolution of a Reckless Upstart into a Visionary Leader . Crown Business . ISBN 978-0-7710-7914-6 . Smith Alexander 2020. They Create Worlds: The Story of the People and Companies That Shaped the Video Game Industry Volume 1: 19711982 . Boca Raton FL: CRC Press . ISBN 978-1-138-38992-2 . External links Steve Jobs at Wikipedias sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Resources from Wikiversity Steve Jobs official memorial page at Apple Steve Jobs discography at Discogs Steve Jobs at IMDb Steve Jobs profile at Forbes Steven Paul Jobs The Vault at FBI Records Steve Jobs at Andy Hertzfeld s The Original Macintosh folklore.org Steve Jobs at Steve Wozniak s woz.org 2011: Steve Jobs: From Garage to Worlds Most Valuable Company . Computer History Museum 2005: Steve Jobs commencement speech at Stanford University 1995: Steve Jobs Founder NeXT Computer excerpts from an Oral History Interview at Smithsonian Institution April 20 1995 1994: Steve Jobs in 1994: The Rolling Stone Interview in Rolling Stone 1990: Steve Jobs Archived December 16 2014 at the Wayback Machine memory and imagination What a computer is to me is its the most remarkable tool that weve ever come up with and its the equivalent of a bicycle for our minds 1983: The Lost Steve Jobs Speech from 1983 ; Foreshadowing Wireless Networking the iPad and the App Store audio clip History of Steve Jobs Full Documentary on YouTube Business positions Preceded by Gil Amelio CEO of Apple 19972011 Succeeded by Tim Cook Preceded by Mike Markkula Apple Chairman 19811985 Succeeded by Mike Markkula Preceded by Apple Chairman 2011 Succeeded by Arthur D. Levinson v t e Steve Jobs Career Timeline Apple Computer history Macintosh NeXT Pixar Return to Apple Thoughts on Flash Legacy Depictions Honors and public recognition Books about The Little Kingdom 1984 The Second Coming of Steve Jobs 2000 iCon 2005 Steve Jobs 2011 The Bite in the Apple 2013 Becoming Steve Jobs 2015 Designed by Apple in California 2016 Small Fry 2018 Make Something Wonderful 2023 Films about Triumph of the Nerds 1996 Pirates of Silicon Valley 1999 Steve Jobs: The Lost Interview 2012 ISteve 2013 Jobs 2013 Steve Jobs 2015 Steve Jobs: The Man in the Machine 2015 Family Laurene Powell Jobs wife Mona Simpson sister Chrisann Brennan mother of his first child Lisa Brennan-Jobs daughter Related Stevenote Reality distortion field Jackling House The Revolution of Steve Jobs Seva Foundation The Son of a Migrant from Syria 2015 mural Venus yacht 1984 commercial Think different Steve Wozniak v t e Apple Inc. History Outline Timeline of products Environment Marketing Supply chain Trade unions Products Hardware Mac iMac Pro MacBook Air Pro Mini Studio Pro iPod Classic Mini Nano Shuffle Touch iPhone Hardware History iPhone models iPad Mini Air Pro Accessories AirPods Pro Max Other Apple SIM AirTag Beats Pill HomePod Mini Silicon TV Vision Pro Watch Software Operating systems iOS iPadOS iPhones iPads iOS history iPadOS history Apps macOS History Server tvOS watchOS bridgeOS Darwin Classic Mac OS visionOS CarPlay Classroom HomeKit Core Foundation Developer Tools FileMaker Final Cut Pro X Compressor Motion Logic Pro MainStage iLife GarageBand iMovie iPhoto iTunes iWork Keynote Numbers Pages Mail QuickTime Safari SceneKit Shazam Siri Swift Xcode Services Financial Card Pay Wallet Media Arcade Books Music 1 Beats Music Up Next Festival iTunes Radio App News Newsstand Podcasts TV originals MLS Season Pass Communication FaceTime Walkie-Talkie iMessage iChat App Game Center Retail and digital sales App Store macOS iTunes Store Connect Store Fifth Avenue Support AppleCare AASP Certifications Genius Bar ProCare One to One Other Apple Account formerly Apple ID Sign in with Apple One Developer iAd TestFlight WWDC iCloud MobileMe Find My Fitness Photos Maps Flyover Look Around Companies Subsidiaries Anobit Apple IMC Apple Studios Beats Beddit Braeburn Capital Claris Acquisitions Completed Anobit AuthenTec Beats Beddit BIS Records Cue EditGrid Emagic FingerWorks Intrinsity InVisage Technologies The Keyboard Company Lala Metaio NeXT Nothing Real P.A. Semi Power Computing PrimeSense Shazam Entertainment Limited Siri Texture Topsy Potential Disney Partnerships AIM alliance Kaleida Labs Taligent Akamai Arm DiDi Digital Ocean iFund Imagination Rockstar Consortium Related Advertising 1984 Think different Get a Mac iPod Product Red Ecosystem Events Criticism Right to repair Tax Headquarters Campus Park University Design IDg Typography Book History Codenames Apple FileWare Community AppleMasters Litigation Antitrust Non-recruiting agreements Price-fixing ebooks FBI encryption dispute Epic Games iOS app approvals Unions AppleToo Depictions of Steve Jobs Linux Asahi Linux iPodLinux Car project People Executives Current Tim Cook CEO Jeff Williams COO Luca Maestri CFO Katherine Adams General Counsel Eddy Cue Craig Federighi Isabel Ge Mahe John Giannandrea Lisa Jackson Greg Joswiak Sabih Khan Deirdre OBrien Dan Riccio Phil Schiller Johny Srouji John Ternus Former Michael Scott CEO Mike Markkula CEO John Sculley CEO Michael Spindler CEO Gil Amelio CEO Steve Jobs CEO Jony Ive CDO Angela Ahrendts Fred D. Anderson John Browett Guerrino De Luca Paul Deneve Al Eisenstat Tony Fadell Scott Forstall Ellen Hancock Nancy R. Heinen Ron Johnson David Nagel Peter Oppenheimer Mark Papermaster Jon Rubinstein Bertrand Serlet Bruce Sewell Sina Tamaddon Avie Tevanian Steve Wozniak Board of directors Current Arthur D. Levinson Chairman Tim Cook CEO James A. Bell Alex Gorsky Al Gore Andrea Jung Ronald D. Sugar Susan L. Wagner Former Mike Markkula Chairman John Sculley Chairman Steve Jobs Chairman Gil Amelio Fred D. Anderson Bill Campbell Mickey Drexler Al Eisenstat Larry Ellison Robert A. Iger Delano Lewis Arthur Rock Eric Schmidt Michael Scott Michael Spindler Edgar S. Woolard Jr. Jerry York Founders Steve Jobs Steve Wozniak Ronald Wayne Italics indicate discontinued products services or defunct companies. Category v t e Key figures in the history of Apple Inc. Founders Steve Jobs Steve Wozniak Ronald Wayne CEOs Michael Scott 19771981 Mike Markkula 19811983 John Sculley 19831993 Michael Spindler 19931996 Gil Amelio 19961997 Steve Jobs 19972011 Tim Cook 2011present Current employees Katherine L. Adams Tim Cook Eddy Cue Chris Espinosa Craig Federighi Dominic Giampaolo John Giannandrea Lisa P. Jackson Greg Joswiak Luca Maestri Bob Mansfield Dan Riccio Phil Schiller Johny Srouji John Ternus Bud Tribble Jeff Williams Steve Wozniak Former employees Gil Amelio Angela Ahrendts Fred D. Anderson Bill Atkinson Susan Barnes Chrisann Brennan Steve Capps Satjiv S. Chahil George Crow Tony Fadell Bill Fernandez Scott Forstall Jean-Louis Gassee Ellen Hancock Nancy R. Heinen Andy Hertzfeld Joanna Hoffman Rod Holt Bruce Horn Jony Ive Steve Jobs Ron Johnson Susan Kare Guy Kawasaki Alan Kay Daniel Kottke Chris Lattner Guerrino De Luca Mike Markkula David Nagel Ike Nassi Don Norman Peter Oppenheimer Rich Page Mark Papermaster Jef Raskin Jon Rubinstein Michael Scott John Sculley Bertrand Serlet Bruce Sewell Burrell Smith Michael Spindler Sina Tamaddon Larry Tesler Avie Tevanian Ronald Wayne Del Yocam v t e Original Macintosh developer team Bill Atkinson Steve Capps George Crow Chris Espinosa Andy Hertzfeld Joanna Hoffman Bruce Horn Steve Jobs Susan Kare Jef Raskin Burrell Smith Bud Tribble Steve Wozniak Randy Wigginton v t e NeXT Corporate directors Steve Jobs Ross Perot John Patrick Crecine Team members Susan Barnes George Crow Joanna Hoffman Steve Jobs Susan Kare Rich Page Bud Tribble Hardware products NeXT Computer NeXTcube NeXTcube Turbo NeXTstation NeXTdimension NeXT MegaPixel Display NeXT Laser Printer Software products NeXTSTEP OpenStep WebObjects Interface Builder Category Commons v t e Pixar Animation Studios A subsidiary of Walt Disney Studios a division of The Walt Disney Company . Feature films Toy Story 1995 A Bugs Life 1998 Toy Story 2 1999 Monsters Inc. 2001 Finding Nemo 2003 The Incredibles 2004 Cars 2006 Ratatouille 2007 WALL-E 2008 Up 2009 Toy Story 3 2010 Cars 2 2011 Brave 2012 Monsters University 2013 Inside Out 2015 The Good Dinosaur 2015 Finding Dory 2016 Cars 3 2017 Coco 2017 Incredibles 2 2018 Toy Story 4 2019 Onward 2020 Soul 2020 Luca 2021 Turning Red 2022 Lightyear 2022 Elemental 2023 Inside Out 2 2024 Upcoming Elio 2025 Short films Original The Adventures of Andre Wally B. 1984 Luxo Jr. 1986 Reds Dream 1987 Tin Toy 1988 Knick Knack 1989 Geris Game 1997 For the Birds 2000 Boundin 2003 One Man Band 2005 Lifted 2006 Presto 2008 Partly Cloudy 2009 Day Night 2010 La Luna 2011 The Blue Umbrella 2013 Lava 2014 Sanjays Super Team 2015 Piper 2016 Lou 2017 Bao 2018 SparkShorts Purl 2019 Smash and Grab 2019 Kitbull 2019 Float 2019 Wind 2019 Loop 2020 Out 2020 Burrow 2020 Twenty Something 2021 Nona 2021 Self 2024 Feature-related Mikes New Car 2002 Jack-Jack Attack 2005 Mr. Incredible and Pals 2005 Mater and the Ghostlight 2006 Your Friend the Rat 2007 BURN-E 2008 Dugs Special Mission 2009 George and A.J. 2009 The Legend of Mordu 2012 Party Central 2013 Rileys First Date? 2015 22 vs. Earth 2021 Ciao Alberto 2021 Series Cars Toons 200814 Toy Story Toons 201112 Forky Asks a Question 201920 Dug Days 202123 Carls Date Cars on the Road 2022 Upcoming Dream Productions 2024 Compilations Tiny Toy Stories 1996 Pixar Short Films Collection Volume 1 2007 Pixar Short Films Collection Volume 2 2012 Pixar Short Films Collection Volume 3 2018 Other works Beach Chair 1986 Flags and Waves 1986 Television series Upcoming Win or Lose 2025 Television specials Toy Story of Terror! 2013 Toy Story That Time Forgot 2014 Franchises Toy Story Monsters Inc. Finding Nemo The Incredibles Cars Inside Out Associated productions Buzz Lightyear of Star Command: The Adventure Begins 2000; direct-to-video film Buzz Lightyear of Star Command 200001; television series Exploring the Reef 2003; short film Planes 2013 The Dam Keeper 2014; short film Planes: Fire Rescue 2014 Borrowed Time 2016; short film Weekends 2017; short film Monsters at Work 2021present; television series Starling 2023; short film Characters Luxo Jr. Toy Story Sheriff Woody Buzz Lightyear Jessie Bo Peep Monsters Inc. Mike Wazowski Dory The Incredibles Bob Parr Helen Parr Dash Parr Violet Parr Edna Mode Cars Lightning McQueen Tow Mater Sally Carrera WALLE Merida Joy Documentaries The Pixar Story 2007 A Spark Story 2021 Disney attractions and experiences Its Tough to Be a Bug! 1998 Buzz Lightyears Space Ranger Spin 1998 A Bugs Land 2002 Turtle Talk with Crush 2004 The Seas with Nemo Friends 2007 Cars Quatre Roues Rallye 2007 Crushs Coaster 2007 Finding Nemo Submarine Voyage 2007 Toy Story Mania! 2008 Monsters Inc. Ride Go Seek 2009 Toy Story Land 2010 RC Racer 2010 Slinky Dog Zigzag Spin 2010 Toy Soldiers Parachute Drop 2010 Alien Swirling Saucers 2018 Slinky Dog Dash 2018 Cars Land 2012 Luigis Flying Tires 2012 Radiator Springs Racers 2012 Luigis Rollickin Roadsters 2016 Remys Ratatouille Adventure 2014 Nemo Friends SeaRider 2017 Pixar Pier 2018 Games of Pixar Pier 2018 Incredicoaster 2018 Pixar Pal-A-Round 2018 Jessies Critter Carousel 2019 Lightning McQueens Racing Academy 2019 Products Pixar Image Computer Software RenderMan Presto Animation System People John Lasseter Edwin Catmull Steve Jobs Alvy Ray Smith Jim Morris Pete Docter See also Awards and nominations feature films short films Film references Computer Graphics Lab Industrial Light Magic Lucasfilm Animation Circle Seven Animation Pixar Canada Pixar Photoscience Team Computer Animation Production System A Computer Animated Hand The Works The Shadow King Rush: A DisneyPixar Adventure Disney Infinity Kingdom Hearts III Walt Disney Animation Studios Disneytoon Studios 20th Century Animation Category Work group v t e Disney Legends Awards 2010s 2011 Jodi Benson Barton Bo Boyd Jim Henson Linda Larkin Paige OHara Regis Philbin Anika Noni Rose Lea Salonga Raymond Watson Guy Williams Bonita Granville Wrather Jack Wrather 2013 Tony Baxter Collin Campbell Dick Clark Billy Crystal John Goodman Steve Jobs Glen Keane Ed Wynn 2015 George Bodenheimer Julie Reihm Casaletto Andreas Deja Johnny Depp Eyvind Earle Danny Elfman Susan Lucci George Lucas Carson Van Osten 2017 Clyde Geronimi Whoopi Goldberg Manuel Gonzales Carrie Fisher Mark Hamill Jack Kirby Wayne Jackson Stan Lee Garry Marshall Julie Taymor Oprah Winfrey 2019 Christina Aguilera Wing T. Chao Robert Downey Jr. Jon Favreau James Earl Jones Bette Midler Kenny Ortega Barnette Ricci Robin Roberts Diane Sawyer Ming-Na Wen Hans Zimmer Awarded posthumously Complete list 1980s 1990s 2000s 2010s 2020s Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia 2 Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz Museum of Modern Art People Trove Other IdRef SNAC Retrieved from https:en.wikipedia.orgwindex.php?titleSteveJobsoldid1249258946 Categories : Steve Jobs 1955 births 2011 deaths 20th-century American businesspeople 21st-century American businesspeople American adoptees American billionaires American Buddhists American computer businesspeople American film producers American film studio executives American financiers American industrial designers American inventors American investors American people of German descent American people of Swiss descent American people of Syrian descent American philanthropists American psychedelic drug advocates American technology chief executives American technology company founders American Zen Buddhists Atari people Burials in California Businesspeople from San Francisco Businesspeople in software Computer designers Deaths from pancreatic cancer in California Directors of Apple Inc. Disney executives Homestead High School California alumni Internet pioneers Liver transplant recipients National Medal of Technology recipients NeXT People from Cupertino California People from Los Altos California People from Mountain View California Businesspeople from Palo Alto California Personal computing Pixar people Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients Spokespersons Technicians Hidden categories: Pages with non-numeric formatnum arguments CS1 Italian-language sources it Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2017 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use American English from March 2015 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from January 2024 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Articles containing Arabic-language text Pages using Lang-xx templates Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2013 All articles containing potentially dated statements Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing potentially dated statements from April 2015 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 4 October 2024 at 00:15 UTC . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view