Ted Bundy - Wikipedia Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Search Search Donate Appearance Create account Log in Personal tools Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk Contents move to sidebar hide Top 1 Early life Toggle Early life subsection 1.1 Childhood 1.2 University years 1.3 First murders 2 Murder spree in the Western states Toggle Murder spree in the Western states subsection 2.1 Washington Oregon 2.2 Idaho Utah Colorado 3 Arrest and first trial 4 Escapes 5 Florida murders and rearrest 6 Subsequent trials marriage 7 Death row confessions and execution 8 Modus operandi and victim profiles 9 Pathology 10 Victims Toggle Victims subsection 10.1 Confirmed 10.2 1974 10.2.1 Washington Oregon 10.2.2 Utah 10.3 1975 10.3.1 Utah Colorado Idaho 10.4 1978 10.4.1 Florida 10.5 Unconfirmed 11 In media Toggle In media subsection 11.1 Books 11.2 Film 11.3 Music 11.4 Television 12 See also 13 Citations 14 General and cited sources 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Ted Bundy 65 languages Afrikaans Asturianu Azrbaycanca Brezhoneg Catala Cestina Dansk Deitsch Deutsch Eesti Espanol Euskara Francais Gaeilge Hausa Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Islenska Italiano Kiswahili Latviesu Lietuviu Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmal Polski Portugues Romana Scots Shqip Simple English Slovencina Slovenscina srpski Suomi Svenska Turkce Tieng Viet Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Special pages Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Wikidata item Printexport Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia the free encyclopedia American serial killer 19461989 For the 2002 biographical film see Ted Bundy film . Ted Bundy Bundy in 1978 Born Theodore Robert Cowell 1946-11-24 November 24 1946 Burlington Vermont U.S. Died January 24 1989 1989-01-24 aged 42 Florida State Prison Raiford Florida U.S. Cause of death Execution by electrocution 4 Other names Chris Hagen Kenneth Misner Officer Roseland Richard Burton Rolf Miller 3 Alma mater University of Washington BA Spouse Carole Ann Boone m. 1980; div. 1986 Children 1 Motive Control Possession Necrophilia Convictions First-degree murder 3 Attempted first-degree murder 3 Aggravated kidnapping Burglary Criminal penalty Three death sentences two in 1979 one in 1980 1 1 to 15 years in prison 1976 2 Escaped June 7 1977 June 13 1977 December 30 1977 February 15 1978 Details Victims 20 confirmed 30 confessed 36 suspected Span of crimes 19741978 Country United States States California Colorado Florida Idaho Oregon Utah Washington Date apprehended August 16 1975 Theodore Robert Bundy ne Cowell ; November 24 1946 January 24 1989 was an American serial killer who kidnapped raped and murdered dozens of young women and girls during the 1970s. After more than a decade of denials he confessed to 30 murders. The total number of his victims is likely to be higher. Bundys modus operandi typically consisted of simulating having a physical impairment to convince his target that he was in need of assistance or duping her into believing he was an authority figure. He would then lure his victim to a vehicle parked in a more secluded area at which point he would bludgeon her unconscious then restrain her with handcuffs before driving his victim to a remote location to be sexually assaulted and killed. Bundy frequently revisited the bodies of those he abducted grooming and performing sex acts on the corpses until decomposition and destruction by wild animals made further interactions impossible. He decapitated at least twelve of his victims keeping their severed heads as mementos in his apartment. On a few occasions Bundy broke into homes at night and bludgeoned maimed strangled andor sexually assaulted his victims in their sleep. In 1975 Bundy was arrested and jailed in Utah for aggravated kidnapping and attempted criminal assault . He then became a suspect in a progressively longer list of unsolved homicides in several states. Facing murder charges in Colorado Bundy engineered two dramatic escapes and committed further assaults in Florida including three murders before being recaptured in 1978. For the Florida homicides he received three death sentences in two trials and was executed in the electric chair at Florida State Prison on January 24 1989. Biographer Ann Rule characterized Bundy as a sadistic sociopath who took pleasure from another humans pain and the control he had over his victims to the point of death and even after. 5 He once described himself as the most cold-hearted son of a bitch youll ever meet 6 7 a statement with which attorney Polly Nelson a member of his last defense team agreed. She wrote that Ted was the very definition of heartless evil. 8 Early life Childhood Ted Bundy was born Theodore Robert Cowell on November 24 1946 to Eleanor Louise Cowell 19242012 at the Elizabeth Lund Home for Unwed Mothers 9 in Burlington Vermont . His biological fathers identity has never been confirmed; his original birth certificate apparently assigns paternity to a salesman and United States Air Force veteran named Lloyd Marshall 10 though a copy of it listed his father as unknown. 11 Louise claimed she met a war veteran named Jack Worthington 12 who abandoned her soon after she became pregnant. 13 Census records reveal that several men by the name of John Worthington and Lloyd Marshall lived near Louise when Bundy was conceived. 14 Some family members expressed suspicions that Bundy was sired by Louises own father. 15 However in the 2020 documentary film Crazy Not Insane psychiatrist Dorothy Otnow Lewis claimed she received a sample of Bundys blood and that a DNA test had confirmed that he was not the product of incest . 16 For the first three years of his life Bundy lived in the Roxborough neighborhood of Philadelphia with his maternal grandparents Samuel Knecht Cowell 18981983 and Eleanor Miriam Longstreet 18951971. The couple raised him as their son to avoid the social stigma that accompanied birth outside of wedlock at that time. Family friends and even young Ted were told that his grandparents were his parents and that his mother was his older sister. Bundy eventually discovered the truth about his family although his recollections of the circumstances varied; he told a girlfriend that a cousin showed him a copy of his birth certificate after calling him a bastard 17 but he told biographers Stephen Michaud and Hugh Aynesworth that he had found the certificate himself. 11 Biographer and true crime writer Ann Rule who knew Bundy personally wrote that he did not find out about his true parentage until 1969 when he located his original birth record in Vermont. 18 Bundy expressed a lifelong resentment toward his mother for never telling him about his real father and for leaving him to discover the truth about his paternity for himself. 19 Bundy occasionally exhibited disturbing behavior at an early age. Louises younger sister Julia Cowell recalled awakening from a nap to find herself surrounded by knives from the kitchen and her three-year-old nephew standing by the bed smiling. 20 In some interviews Bundy spoke warmly of his grandparents 21 and told Rule that he identified with respected and clung to his grandfather Samuel. 22 In 1987 however he and other family members told attorneys that Samuel was a tyrannical bully who beat his wife and dog swung neighborhood cats by their tails and expressed racist and xenophobic attitudes. In one instance Samuel reportedly threw Julia down a flight of stairs for oversleeping. 23 He would sometimes speak aloud to unseen presences 24 and at least once flew into a violent rage when the question of Bundys paternity was raised. 23 Bundy described his grandmother as a timid and obedient woman who periodically underwent electroconvulsive therapy for depression 24 and feared to leave their house toward the end of her life. 25 These descriptions of Bundys grandparents have been questioned in more recent investigations. Some locals in Roxborough remembered Samuel as a fine man and expressed bewilderment at the reports of him being violent. The characterization that Sam was a raging alcoholic and animal abuser was a convenient characterization used to make people justify why Ted was the way he was said one of Bundys cousins. From my limited exposure to him nothing could be farther from the truth. His daughters loved him dearly and had nothing but fond memories of him. In addition Louises sister Audrey Cowell stated that their mother could not leave her home because she suffered a stroke due to being overweight and was not mentally ill. 26 Bundy as a high school senior in 1965 In 1950 Louise changed her surname from Cowell to Nelson 27 and at the urging of multiple family members left Philadelphia with Ted to live with cousins Alan and Jane Scott in Tacoma Washington . 28 29 In 1951 Louise met Johnny Culpepper Bundy 19212007 a hospital cook at an adult singles night at Tacomas First Methodist Church. 30 They married later that year and Johnny formally adopted Ted. 30 Johnny and Louise conceived four children together and though Johnny tried to include his adopted son in camping trips and other family activities Bundy remained distant from him. Bundy would later complain to a girlfriend that Johnny was not his real father wasnt very bright and didnt make much money. 31 Bundy varied his recollections of Tacoma in later years. To Michaud and Aynesworth he described roaming his neighborhood picking through trash barrels in search of pictures of naked women. 32 To attorney and author Polly Nelson he said that he perused detective magazines and crime novels for stories that involved sexual violence particularly when the stories were illustrated with pictures of dead or maimed women. 33 In a letter to Rule however he asserted that he never ever read fact-detective magazines and shuddered at the thought that anyone would. 34 He once told Michaud that he would consume large quantities of alcohol and canvass the community late at night in search of undraped windows where he could observe women undressing or whatever else could be seen. 35 Psychologist Al Carlisle claimed that Bundy started fantasizing about women he saw while window peeping or elsewhere and mimicking the accents of some politicians he listened to on the radio. In essence he was fantasizing about being someone else someone important. 29 Bundys childhood Tacoma neighbor Sandi Holt described him as a bully and a mean-spirited kid . He liked to terrify people Holt later said. He liked to be in charge. He liked to inflict pain and suffering and fear. 29 She also alleged that Bundy engaged in animal cruelty : He hung one of the stray cats in the neighborhood from one of the clothes lines in the backyard doused it in lighter fluid and set it on fire and I heard that cat squealing. 29 She claimed that Bundy would take younger children in the neighborhood into the woods and terrorize them. Hed take them out there and strip them down take their clothes she said. Youd hear them screaming for blocks I mean no matter where we were here we could hear them screaming. 29 Holt added that Bundy built makeshift punji traps around his neighborhood injuring at least one girl. One little girl went over the top of one of Teds tiger traps and got the whole side of her leg slit open with the sharpened point of the stick that she landed on. 29 36 Accounts of Bundys social life also varied. He told journalists Michaud and Aynesworth that he chose to be alone as an adolescent because he was unable to understand interpersonal relationships; 37 he also claimed to have no natural sense of how to develop friendships. I didnt know what made people want to be friends Bundy claimed. I didnt know what underlay social interactions. 38 Some people perceived me as being shy and introverted he said. I didnt go to dances. I didnt go on the beer drinking outings. I was a pretty you might call me straight but not a social outcast in any way. 29 Classmates from Woodrow Wilson High School however told Rule that Bundy was well known and well liked there a medium-sized fish in a large pond. 39 His only significant athletic avocation was downhill skiing which he pursued enthusiastically with stolen equipment and forged lift tickets. 11 During high school Bundy was arrested at least twice on suspicion of burglary and motor vehicle theft . At age 18 the details of the incidents were expunged from his record as is customary in Washington and many other states. 40 University years After graduating from high school in 1965 Bundy attended the University of Puget Sound UPS for one year before transferring to the University of Washington UW to study Chinese . 41 In 1967 he became romantically involved with a UW classmate Diane Edwards identified in Bundy biographies by several pseudonyms most commonly Stephanie Brooks. 42 Bundy later described Edwards as the only woman I ever really loved. 43 In early 1968 Bundy dropped out of college and worked a series of minimum-wage jobs. He also volunteered at the Seattle office of Nelson Rockefeller s presidential campaign 44 and became Arthur Fletcher s driver and bodyguard during Fletchers campaign for Lieutenant Governor of Washington State . 45 Edwards graduated in the spring of 1968 and left Washington for San Francisco . Bundy visited her later that year after he earned a scholarship to study Chinese at Stanford University that summer. 46 In August Bundy attended the 1968 Republican National Convention in Miami . 47 Shortly thereafter Edwards ended their relationship and returned to her family home in California frustrated by what she described as Bundys immaturity and lack of ambition. Lewis would later pinpoint this crisis as probably the pivotal time in his development. 48 Devastated by the breakup Bundy traveled to Colorado and then farther east visiting relatives in Arkansas and Philadelphia and enrolling for one semester at Temple University . 49 It was also at this time in early 1969 Rule believed that Bundy discovered his true parentage in Vermont. 49 50 Bundy returned to Washington in the fall of 1969 when he met Elizabeth Kloepfer identified in Bundy literature as Meg Anders Beth Archer or Liz Kendall a single mother from Ogden Utah who worked as a secretary at the UW School of Medicine. 51 Their tumultuous relationship would continue well past his initial incarceration in Utah in 1976. 52 Bundy became a father figure to Kloepfers daughter Molly who was three years old when he started dating her mother; he remained in her life until she was aged 10 after he had been arrested. As an adult Molly wrote of incidents beginning at age 7 in which Bundy was abusive or sexually inappropriate with her. Her accounts include Bundy hitting her in the face knocking her down putting her at risk of drowning indecent exposure and sexual touching disguised as accidents or games . 53 In mid-1970 Bundy now focused and goal-oriented re-enrolled at UW this time as a psychology major. He became an honor student and was well regarded by his professors. 54 In 1971 he took a job at Seattle s Suicide Hotline Crisis Center. There he met and worked alongside Ann Rule a former Seattle police officer and aspiring crime writer who would later write one of the definitive Bundy biographies The Stranger Beside Me . Rule saw nothing disturbing in Bundys personality at the time; she described him as kind solicitous and empathetic. 55 After graduating from UW in 1972 56 Bundy joined Governor Daniel J. Evans s re-election campaign. 57 Posing as a college student he shadowed Evans opponent former governor Albert Rosellini and recorded his stump speeches for analysis by Evanss team. 58 59 Evans subsequently appointed Bundy to the Seattle Crime Prevention Advisory Committee. 60 After Evans was re-elected Bundy was hired as an assistant to Ross Davis Chairman of the Washington State Republican Party . Davis thought well of Bundy and described him as smart aggressive ... and a believer in the system. 61 In early 1973 despite mediocre LSAT scores Bundy was accepted into the law schools of UPS and the University of Utah U of U on the strength of letters of recommendation from Evans Davis and several UW psychology professors. 62 63 During a trip to California on Republican Party business in the summer of 1973 Bundy rekindled his relationship with Edwards. She marveled at his transformation into a serious and dedicated professional seemingly on the cusp of a significant legal and political career. Bundy continued to date Kloepfer as well; neither woman was aware of the others existence. In the fall of 1973 Bundy matriculated at UPS Law School 64 and continued courting Edwards who flew to Seattle several times to stay with him. They discussed marriage; at one point he introduced her to Davis as his fiancee. 31 In January 1974 Bundy abruptly broke off all contact with Edwards; her phone calls and letters went unreturned. When she finally reached him by phone a month later she demanded to know why he had unilaterally ended their relationship without explanation. In a flat calm voice he replied Diane I have no idea what you mean and hung up. She never heard from him again. 65 Bundy later explained I just wanted to prove to myself that I could have married her ; 66 but Edwards concluded in retrospect that Teds high-power courtship in the latter part of 1973 had been deliberately planned that he had waited all those years to be in a position of where he could make her fall in love with him so that he could drop her reject her as she had rejected him. 65 By then Bundy had begun skipping classes at law school. By April he had stopped attending entirely 67 as young women began to disappear in the Pacific Northwest . 68 First murders There is no consensus as to when or where Bundy began killing women. He told different stories to different people and refused to divulge the specifics of his earliest crimes even as he confessed in graphic detail to dozens of later murders in the days preceding his execution. 69 Bundy told Nelson that he attempted his first kidnapping in Ocean City New Jersey in 1969 but did not kill anyone until sometime in 1971 in Seattle. 70 He told psychologist Art Norman that he killed two women in Atlantic City while visiting family in Philadelphia in 1969. 71 72 Bundy hinted to homicide detective Robert Keppel that he committed a murder in Seattle in 1972 73 and another murder in 1973 that involved a hitchhiker near Tumwater but he refused to elaborate. 74 Rule and Keppel both believed that he might have started killing as a teenager. 75 76 Bundys earliest documented homicides were committed in 1974 when he was 27. By his own admission he had by then mastered the necessary skills in the era before DNA profiling to leave minimal incriminating forensic evidence at crime scenes. 77 Murder spree in the Western states Washington Oregon Lynda Ann Healy Shortly after midnight on January 4 1974 around the time that he terminated his relationship with Edwards Bundy entered the basement apartment of 18-year-old Karen Sparks 78 often identified as Joni Lenz 79 80 Mary Adams 81 and Terri Caldwell 82 in Bundy literature a dancer and student at UW in Seattles University District . After bludgeoning Sparks with a metal rod from her bed frame he sexually assaulted her with the same rod 66 83 80 causing extensive internal injuries and rupturing her bladder . Sparks remained unconscious in the hospital for ten days 82 and although she survived she was left with permanent brain damage with significant loss to her vision and hearing. In the early morning hours of February 1 Bundy broke into the basement room of 21-year-old Lynda Ann Healy a UW undergraduate who broadcast morning radio weather reports for skiers. He beat her unconscious dressed her in blue jeans a white blouse and boots and carried her away. 84 He later stated that he drove Healy to a secluded area where he raped and murdered her before dumping her body. 85 During the first half of 1974 female college students disappeared at the rate of about one per month. On March 12 Donna Gail Manson a 19-year-old student at Evergreen State College in Olympia 60 miles 95 km southwest of Seattle left her dormitory to attend a jazz concert on campus but never arrived. 86 Bundy claimed that he burned Mansons skull in his girlfriends fireplace down to the last ash in a fit of... paranoia and cleanliness . 87 On April 17 18-year-old Susan Elaine Rancourt disappeared while on her way to her dorm room after an evening advisors meeting at Central Washington State College in Ellensburg 110 miles 175 km southeast of Seattle. 86 88 Two female Central Washington students later came forward to report encountersone on the night of Rancourts disappearance the other three nights earlierwith a man wearing a sling who was asking for help carrying a load of books to his brown or tan Volkswagen Beetle . 89 90 On May 6 Roberta Kathleen Parks aged 22 left her dormitory at Oregon State University in Corvallis 91 260 miles 420 km south of Seattle to have coffee with friends at the Memorial Union but never arrived. 92 Bundy claimed that he spotted Parks in the cafeteria and persuaded her to go with him to a bar. After they got into his car he tied and gagged Parks and drove her back to Washington to be killed raping her twice on the way. 93 On June 1 Brenda Carol Ball 22 disappeared after leaving the Flame Tavern in Burien near SeattleTacoma International Airport . She was last seen in the parking lot talking to a brown-haired man with his arm in a sling. 94 Bundy later stated he brought Ball back to his residence where they had a consensual sexual encounter before he strangled her while she was sleeping; although this failed to explain the damage done to her skull. 95 Investigators from Seattle and King County grew increasingly concerned. There was no significant physical evidence and the missing women had little in common apart from similar appearance: young attractive white college students with long hair parted in the middle. 96 In the early hours of June 11 18-year-old UW student Georgann Hawkins vanished while walking down a brightly lit alley between her boyfriends dormitory residence and her sorority house. 97 The next morning three Seattle homicide detectives and a criminalist combed the entire alleyway on their hands and knees finding nothing. 98 Bundy later told Keppel that he lured Hawkins to his car and knocked her unconscious with a crowbar . After handcuffing her he drove her to Issaquah a suburb 20 miles 30 km east of Seattle where he strangled her and spent the entire night with her body. 99 100 The next afternoon he returned to the UW alley and in the very midst of a major crime scene investigation located and gathered Hawkins earrings and one of her shoes where he had left them in the adjoining parking lot and departed unobserved. It was a feat so brazen wrote Keppel that it astonishes police even today. 101 Bundy said he revisited Hawkins corpse on three occasions. 102 After Hawkins disappearance was publicized witnesses came forward to report seeing a man on crutches with a leg cast and carrying a briefcase in an alley behind a nearby dormitory on the night of her disappearance. 103 One woman recalled that the man asked her to help him carry the case to his car a light brown Volkswagen Beetle. 104 During this period Bundy was working in Olympia as the assistant director of the Seattle Crime Prevention Advisory Committee where he wrote a pamphlet for women on rape prevention. 105 Later he worked at the Department of Emergency Services DES a state government agency involved in the search for the missing women. At the DES he met and began dating Carole Ann Boone 19472018 a twice-divorced mother of two who would play an important role in the final phase of his life six years later. 106 Bundys 1968 Volkswagen Beetle in which he committed many of his crimes. The vehicle was on display at the now-defunct National Museum of Crime and Punishment 107 108 and is now at the Alcatraz East Crime Museum in Pigeon Forge Tennessee . 109 Reports of the brutal attack on Sparks and the six missing women appeared prominently in newspapers and on television throughout Washington and Oregon . 110 Fear spread among the population; hitchhiking by young women dropped sharply. 111 Pressure mounted on law enforcement agencies 112 but the scarcity of physical evidence severely hampered them. Police would not provide reporters with the little information that was available for fear of compromising the investigation. 113 Further similarities between the victims were noted: the disappearances all took place at night usually near ongoing construction work and were within a week of midterm or final exams. All of the victims were wearing slacks or blue jeans when they disappeared and at many crime scenes there were sightings of a man wearing a cast or a sling and driving a brown or tan Volkswagen Beetle. 114 The Washington and Oregon murders culminated on July 14 with the abductions in broad daylight of two women from a crowded beach at Lake Sammamish State Park in Issaquah. 115 Four female witnesses described an attractive young man wearing a white tennis outfit with his left arm in a sling speaking with a light accent perhaps Canadian or British. Introducing himself as Ted he asked their help in unloading a sailboat from his tan or bronze-colored Volkswagen Beetle. Three refused; one accompanied him as far as his car saw that there was no sailboat and fled. Three additional witnesses saw Ted approach Janice Ann Ott 23 a probation caseworker at the King County Juvenile Court with the sailboat story and watched her leave the beach in his company. 116 About four hours later Denise Marie Naslund a 19-year-old woman who was studying to become a computer programmer left a picnic to go to the restroom and never returned. 117 Bundy told Stephen Michaud and FBI agent William Hagmaier that Ott was still alive when he returned with Naslund and that he forced one to watch as he assaulted and murdered the other 118 119 120 but he later denied it in an interview with Lewis on the eve of his execution. 121 King County police finally armed with a detailed description of their suspect and his car posted fliers throughout the Seattle area. A composite sketch was printed in regional newspapers and broadcast on local television stations. Kloepfer Rule a DES employee and a UW psychology professor all recognized the profile the sketch and the car and reported Bundy as a possible suspect; 122 but detectiveswho were receiving up to 200 tips per day 123 thought it unlikely that a clean-cut law student with no adult criminal record could be the perpetrator. 124 On September 6 two grouse hunters stumbled across the skeletal remains of Ott and Naslund near a service road in Issaquah 2 miles 3 km east of Lake Sammamish State Park. 115 125 An extra femur and several vertebrae found at the site were later identified by Bundy as those of Hawkins. 126 Six months later forestry students from Green River Community College discovered the skulls and mandibles of Healy Rancourt Parks and Ball on Taylor Mountain where Bundy frequently hiked just east of Issaquah. Mansons remains were never recovered. 127 Idaho Utah Colorado Rooming house in Salt Lake City where Bundy lived from September 1974 to October 1975 showing the fire escape used to sneak into his room and windows to the utility room where he concealed photo souvenirs of his murders. 128 In August 1974 Bundy received a second acceptance from the University of Utah Law School and moved to Salt Lake City leaving Kloepfer in Seattle. While he called Kloepfer often he dated at least a dozen other women. 129 As he studied the first-year law curriculum a second time Bundy was devastated to find out that the other students had something some intellectual capacity that he did not. He found the classes completely incomprehensible. It was a great disappointment to me he said. 130 A new string of homicides began the following month including two that would remain undiscovered until Bundy confessed to them shortly before his execution. On September 2 Bundy raped and strangled a still-unidentified hitchhiker in Idaho then returned the next day to photograph and dismember the corpse before disposing of the remains in a nearby river. 131 132 133 On October 2 he abducted 16-year-old Nancy Wilcox in Holladay Utah a suburb of Salt Lake City. 134 135 Bundy confessed that Wilcox was walking on a poorly lit main roadway when he parked his car and forced her into an orchard. He then restrained her put her into his vehicle and drove back to his apartment where he allegedly kept her for 24 hours. 136 Bundy informed investigators that her remains were buried near Capitol Reef National Park some 200 miles 320 km south of Holladay but they were never found. 137 On October 18 Melissa Anne Smiththe 17-year-old daughter of the police chief of Midvale another Salt Lake City suburbdisappeared after leaving a pizza parlor at around 9:30 p.m. Her nude body was found in a nearby mountainous area nine days later; post-mortem examination indicated that she may have remained alive for up to seven days following her disappearance. 138 139 On October 31 Laura Ann Aime also aged 17 disappeared 25 miles 40 km south of Lehi after leaving a Halloween party by herself just after midnight; she was last seen trying to hitchhike. 140 Her naked body was found by hikers 9 miles 14 km to the northeast in American Fork Canyon on Thanksgiving Day . 141 The medical examiner estimated that Aime had died on November 20; twenty days after her disappearance. Both Smith and Aime had been beaten raped sodomized and strangled with nylon stockings. 142 143 Years later Bundy described his post-mortem rituals with the corpses of Smith and Aime including hair shampooing and application of makeup. 144 145 In the late afternoon of November 8 Bundy approached 18-year-old telephone operator Carol DaRonch at Fashion Place Mall in Murray 146 less than a mile from the Midvale restaurant where Smith was last seen. He identified himself as Officer Roseland of the Murray Police Department and told DaRonch that someone had attempted to break into her car. He asked her to accompany him to the station to file a complaint. When DaRonch pointed out to Bundy that he was driving on a road that did not lead to the police station he immediately pulled onto the shoulder and attempted to handcuff her. During their struggle he inadvertently fastened both handcuffs to the same wrist and DaRonch was able to open the car door and escape. 147 Later that evening Debra Jean Kent a 17-year-old student at Viewmont High School in Bountiful 20 miles 30 km north of Murray disappeared after leaving a theater production at the school to pick up her brother. 148 The schools drama teacher and a student told police that a stranger had asked each of them to come out to the parking lot to identify a car. Another student later saw the same man pacing in the rear of the auditorium and the drama teacher spotted him again shortly before the end of the play. 149 Outside the auditorium investigators found a key that unlocked the handcuffs removed from DaRonchs wrist. 150 Bundy eventually admitted to abducting Kent and keeping her at his apartment for a day stating she was alive during half of it. 151 In November Kloepfer called King County police a second time after reading that young women were disappearing in towns surrounding Salt Lake City. Detective Randy Hergesheimer of the Major Crimes division interviewed her in detail. By then Bundy had risen considerably on the King County hierarchy of suspicion but the Lake Sammamish witness considered most reliable by detectives failed to identify him from a photo lineup . 152 In December Kloepfer called the Salt Lake County Sheriffs Office and repeated her suspicions. Bundys name was added to their list of suspects but at that time no credible forensic evidence linked him to the Utah murders. 153 In January 1975 Bundy returned to Seattle after his final exams and spent a week with Kloepfer who did not tell him that she had reported him to police on three occasions. She made plans to visit him in Salt Lake City in August. 154 Caryn Campbell: Bundys 14th documented murder victim and the subject of his first homicide indictment. In 1975 Bundy shifted much of his criminal activity eastward from his base in Utah to Colorado. On January 12 a 23-year-old registered nurse named Caryn Eileen Campbell disappeared while walking down a well-lit hallway between the elevator and her room at the Wildwood Inn now the Wildwood Lodge in Snowmass Village 400 miles 640 km southeast of Salt Lake City. 155 Her nude body was found a month later next to a dirt road just outside the resort. According to the coroners report she had been killed by blows to her head from a blunt instrument that left distinctive linear grooved depressions on her skull; her assailant had slit her left earlobe and her body also bore deep cuts from a sharp weapon. 156 On March 15 100 miles 160 km northeast of Snowmass Village Vail ski instructor Julie Lyle Cunningham aged 26 disappeared while walking from her apartment to a dinner date with a friend. Bundy later told Colorado investigators that he approached Cunningham on crutches and asked her to help carry his ski boots to his car where he clubbed and handcuffed her before sexually assaulting her at a secondary site near Rifle 90 miles 140 km west of Vail. 157 158 Weeks later he made the six-hour drive from Salt Lake City to revisit her remains. 158 159 Denise Lynn Oliverson aged 25 disappeared near the UtahColorado border in Grand Junction on April 6 while riding her bicycle to her parents house; her bike and sandals were found under a viaduct near a railroad bridge. 160 Bundy stated he abducted Oliverson killed her in his car near the Utah state line and dumped her body in the Colorado River . This admission was supported by gas receipts which showed that he was in the city on the same day that Oliverson went missing. On May 6 Bundy parked outside of the Alameda Junior High School in Pocatello Idaho 160 miles 255 km north of Salt Lake City and after seeing 12-year-old Lynette Dawn Culver walking along by herself he lured her into his vehicle before driving her to his Holiday Inn hotel room. 161 He then raped Culver and drowned her in the bathtub. He disposed of her body in the Snake River north of Pocatello. Bundy reportedly provided intimate details about Lynettes personal life in his confession. 162 163 Caryn Campbell disappeared while walking down this brightly lit hallway to her hotel room in January 1975. In mid-May three of Bundys Washington State DES co-workers including Boone visited him in Salt Lake City and stayed for a week in his apartment. He subsequently spent a week in Seattle with Kloepfer in early-June and they discussed getting married the following Christmas. Again Kloepfer made no mention of her multiple discussions with authorities in King County and Salt Lake County. Bundy disclosed neither his ongoing relationship with Boone nor a concurrent romance with a Utah law student known in various accounts as either Kim Andrews 164 or Sharon Auer 165 . On June 28 15-year-old Susan Curtis vanished from the campus of Brigham Young University in Provo 45 miles 70 km south of Salt Lake City. Her murder became Bundys last confession tape-recorded moments before he entered the execution chamber. 166 The bodies of victims Wilcox Kent Cunningham Oliverson Culver and Curtis were never recovered. In August 1975 Bundy was baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints LDS Church although he was not an active participant in services and ignored most church restrictions. 167 168 169 He would later be excommunicated by the LDS Church following his 1976 kidnapping conviction. 167 When asked his religious preference after his arrest Bundy answered Methodist the religion of his childhood. 170 In Washington State investigators were still struggling to analyze the Pacific Northwest murder spree that had ended as abruptly as it had begun. In an effort to make sense of an overwhelming mass of data they resorted to the then-innovative strategy of compiling a database . They used the King County payroll computer a huge primitive machine by contemporary standards but the only one available for their use. After inputting the many lists they had compiledclassmates and acquaintances of each victim Volkswagen owners named Ted known sex offenders and so onthey queried the computer for coincidences. Out of thousands of names 26 turned up on four lists; one was Bundy. Detectives also manually compiled a list of their 100 best suspects and Bundy was on that list as well. He was literally at the top of the pile of suspects when word came from Utah of his arrest. 171 Arrest and first trial Items found in Bundys Volkswagen Utah 1975 On August 16 1975 Bundy was arrested by Utah Highway Patrol officer Bob Hayward in Granger another Salt Lake City suburb. 172 Hayward observed Bundy cruising a residential area in his Volkswagen Beetle during the pre-dawn hours and fleeing at high speed after seeing the patrol car. 173 He noticed that the Volkswagens front passenger seat had been removed and placed on the rear seats and searched the car. He found a ski mask a second mask fashioned from pantyhose a crowbar handcuffs trash bags a coil of rope an ice pick and other items initially assumed to be burglary tools. Bundy explained that the ski mask was for skiing he had found the handcuffs in a dumpster and the rest were common household items. 174 However Detective Jerry Thompson remembered a similar suspect and car description from the November 1974 DaRonch kidnapping and Bundys name from Kloepfers phone call a month later. In a search of Bundys apartment police found a guide to Colorado ski resorts with a checkmark by the Wildwood Inn 175 and a brochure that advertised the Viewmont High School play in Bountiful where Kent had disappeared. 176 Police did not have sufficient evidence to detain Bundy so he was released on his own recognizance . He later said that searchers missed a hidden collection of Polaroid photographs of his victims which he destroyed after he was released. 177 Salt Lake City police placed Bundy on 24-hour surveillance and Thompson flew to Seattle with two other detectives to interview Kloepfer. She told them that in the year prior to Bundys move to Utah she had discovered objects that she couldnt understand in her house and in Bundys apartment. These items included crutches a bag of plaster of Paris that he admitted stealing from a medical supply house and a meat cleaver that was never used for cooking. Additional objects included surgical gloves an Oriental knife in a wooden case that he kept in his glove compartment and a sack full of womens clothing. 178 Bundy was perpetually in debt and Kloepfer suspected that he had stolen almost everything of significant value that he possessed. When she confronted him over a new TV and stereo he warned her If you tell anyone Ill break your fucking neck. 179 She said Bundy became very upset whenever she considered cutting her hair which was long and parted in the middle. She would sometimes awaken in the middle of the night to find him under the bed covers with a flashlight examining her body. He kept a lug wrench taped halfway up the handle in the trunk of her caranother Volkswagen Beetle which he often borrowed for protection . The detectives confirmed that Bundy had not been with Kloepfer on any of the nights during which the Pacific Northwest victims had vanished nor on the day Ott and Naslund were abducted from Lake Sammamish State Park. 180 Shortly thereafter Kloepfer was interviewed by Seattle homicide detective Kathy McChesney and learned of the existence of Edwards and her brief engagement to Bundy around Christmas 1973. 181 In September Bundy sold his Volkswagen Beetle to a Midvale teenager. 182 Utah police impounded it and FBI technicians dismantled and searched it. They found hairs matching samples obtained from Campbells body. 183 Later they also identified hair strands microscopically indistinguishable from those of Smith and DaRonch. 184 FBI lab specialist Robert Neill concluded that the presence of hair strands in one car matching three different victims who had never met one another would be a coincidence of mind-boggling rarity . 185 On October 2 detectives put Bundy into a lineup. DaRonch immediately identified him as Officer Roseland and witnesses from Bountiful recognized him as the stranger at the Viewmont High School auditorium. 186 There was insufficient evidence to link him to Kent whose body had not yet been found 187 but more than enough evidence to charge him with aggravated kidnapping and attempted criminal assault in the DaRonch case. Bundy denied knowing DaRonch but had no alibi and was freed on 15 000 bail paid by his parents 188 and spent most of the time between indictment and trial in Seattle living in Kloepfers house. Seattle police had insufficient evidence to charge him in the Pacific Northwest murders but kept him under close surveillance. When Ted and I stepped out on the porch to go somewhere Kloepfer wrote so many unmarked police cars started up that it sounded like the beginning of the Indy 500 . 189 In November the three principal Bundy investigatorsJerry Thompson from Utah Robert Keppel from Washington and Michael Fisher from Coloradomet in Aspen Colorado and exchanged information with thirty detectives and prosecutors from five states. 190 While officials left the meeting later referred to as the Aspen Summit convinced that Bundy was the murderer they sought they agreed that more hard evidence would be needed before he could be charged with any of the killings. 191 In February 1976 Bundy stood trial for the DaRonch kidnapping. On the advice of his attorney John OConnell he waived his right to a jury due to the negative publicity surrounding the case. After a four-day bench trial and a weekend of deliberation Judge Stewart Hanson Jr. found Bundy guilty of kidnapping and assault. 192 164 193 In June he was sentenced to one to 15 years in the Utah State Prison . 188 In October Bundy was found hiding in bushes in the prison yard carrying an escape kit road maps airline schedules and a Social Security cardand spent several weeks in solitary confinement . 194 Later that month Colorado authorities charged him with Campbells murder. After a period of resistance he waived extradition proceedings and was transferred to Aspen in January 1977. 195 196 Escapes Pitkin County Courthouse where Bundy jumped from the second window from the left second story to escape. 197 On June 7 1977 Bundy was transported 40 miles 64 km from the Garfield County jail in Glenwood Springs to Pitkin County Courthouse in Aspen for a preliminary hearing . He had elected to serve as his own attorney and as such was excused by the judge from wearing handcuffs or leg shackles. 198 During a recess Bundy asked to visit the courthouses law library to research his case. While shielded from his guards view behind a bookcase he opened a window and jumped to the ground from the second story injuring his right ankle as he landed. After shedding an outer layer of clothing Bundy limped through Aspen as roadblocks were being set up on its outskirts then hiked south onto Aspen Mountain . Near its summit he broke into a hunting cabin and stole food clothing and a rifle . 199 The following day Bundy left the cabin and continued south toward the town of Crested Butte but became lost in the forest. For two days he wandered aimlessly on the mountain missing two trails that led downward to his intended destination. On June 10 Bundy broke into a camping trailer on Maroon Lake 10 miles 16 km south of Aspen taking food and a ski parka; however instead of continuing southward he walked back north toward Aspen eluding roadblocks and search parties along the way. 200 Three days later he stole a car at the edge of an Aspen golf course. Cold sleep-deprived and in constant pain from his sprained ankle Bundy drove back into Aspen where two police officers noticed his car weaving in and out of its lane and pulled him over. He had been a fugitive for six days. 201 In the car were maps of the mountain area around Aspen that prosecutors were using to demonstrate the location of Campbells body as his own attorney Bundy had rights of discovery indicating that his escape had been planned. 202 1977 photographtaken shortly after first escape and recapture 203 from Bundys FBI Ten Most Wanted Fugitives poster. Back in jail in Glenwood Springs Bundy ignored the advice of friends and legal advisors to stay put. The case against him already weak at best was deteriorating steadily as pretrial motions consistently resolved in his favor and significant bits of evidence were ruled inadmissible. 204 A more rational defendant might have realized that he stood a good chance of acquittal and that beating the murder charge in Colorado would probably have dissuaded other prosecutors ... with as little as a year and a half to serve on the DaRonch conviction had Ted persevered he could have been a free man. 205 Instead Bundy assembled a new escape plan. He acquired a detailed floor plan of the Garfield County jail and a hacksaw blade from other inmates. He accumulated 500 in cash smuggled in over a six-month period by visitors Boone in particular. 206 During the evenings while other prisoners were showering Bundy sawed a hole about one square foot 0.093 m 2 between the steel reinforcing bars in his cells ceiling. Having lost 35 pounds 16 kg he was able to wriggle through and explore the crawl space above 207 in the weeks that followed. Multiple reports from an informant of movement within the ceiling during the night were not investigated. 208 By late 1977 Bundys impending trial had become a cause celebre in the small town of Aspen and Bundy filed a motion for a change of venue to Denver . 209 On December 23 the Aspen trial judge granted the request but to Colorado Springs where juries had historically been hostile to murder suspects. 210 On the night of December 30 with most of the jail staff on Christmas break and nonviolent prisoners on furlough with their families 211 Bundy piled books and files in his bed covered them with a blanket to simulate his sleeping body and climbed into the crawl space. He broke through the ceiling into the apartment of the chief jailer who was out for the evening with his wife 212 changed into street clothes from the jailers closet and walked out the front door to freedom. 213 After stealing a car Bundy drove eastward out of Glenwood Springs but the car soon broke down in the mountains on Interstate 70 . A passing motorist gave him a ride into Vail 60 miles 97 km to the east. From there he caught a bus to Denver where he boarded a morning flight to Chicago . Back in Glenwood Springs the jails skeleton crew did not discover the escape until noon on December 31 more than seventeen hours later. By then Bundy was already in Chicago. 214 Florida murders and rearrest From Chicago Bundy traveled by train to Ann Arbor Michigan where he was present in a local tavern on January 2. 215 Five days later he stole a car and drove south to Atlanta where he boarded a bus and arrived in Tallahassee Florida on the morning of January 8. He stayed for one night at a hotel before renting a room under the alias Chris Hagen at a boarding house near the Florida State University FSU campus. 216 Bundy later said that he initially resolved to find legitimate employment and refrain from further criminal activity knowing he could probably remain free and undetected in Florida indefinitely as long as he did not attract the attention of police; 217 but his lone job application at a construction site had to be abandoned when he was asked to produce identification. 218 He reverted to his old habits of shoplifting and stealing money and credit cards from womens wallets left in shopping carts at local grocery stores. 219 A Chi Omega sorority house resident gazes from a window of the premises hours after Bundys rampage. In the early hours of January 15 1978one week after his arrival in TallahasseeBundy entered FSUs Chi Omega sorority house through a rear door with a faulty locking mechanism. 220 Beginning at about 2:45 a.m. he bludgeoned Margaret Elizabeth Bowman aged 21 with a piece of oak firewood as she slept then garroted her with a nylon stocking. 221 He then entered the bedroom of 20-year-old Lisa Janet Levy and beat her unconscious strangled her tore one of her nipples bit deeply into her left buttock and sexually assaulted her with a hair mist bottle. 222 In an adjoining bedroom he attacked Kathy Kleiner aged 21 breaking her jaw and deeply lacerating her shoulder; and Karen Chandler aged 21 who suffered a concussion broken jaw loss of teeth and a crushed finger. 223 Chandler and Kleiner survived the attack; Kleiner attributed their survival to automobile headlights illuminating the interior of their room and frightening away the attacker. 224 225 Tallahassee detectives determined that the four attacks took place in a total of less than 15 minutes within earshot of more than 30 witnesses who heard nothing. 220 After leaving the sorority house Bundy broke into a basement apartment eight blocks away and attacked 21-year-old FSU student Cheryl Thomas dislocating her shoulder and fracturing her jaw and skull in five places. She was left with permanent deafness in her left ear and equilibrium damage that ended her dance career. 226 On Thomas bed police found a semen stain and a pantyhose mask containing two hairs similar to Bundys in class and characteristic . 227 228 Kimberly Leach On February 8 Bundy drove 150 miles 240 km east to Jacksonville in a stolen FSU van. In a parking lot he approached 14-year-old Leslie Parmenter the daughter of the Jacksonville Police Departments chief of detectives identifying himself as Richard Burton Fire Department but retreated when Parmenters older brother arrived and confronted him. 229 That afternoon he backtracked 60 miles 97 km westward to Lake City . At Lake City Junior High School the following morning 12-year-old Kimberly Dianne Leach was summoned to her homeroom by a teacher to retrieve a forgotten purse; she never returned to class. Seven weeks later after an intensive search her partially mummified remains were found in a pig farrowing shed near Suwannee River State Park 35 miles 56 km northwest of Lake City. 230 231 Forensic experts surmised that Leach had been raped before having her throat cut and her genitals mutilated with a knife. 232 233 On February 12 with insufficient cash to pay his overdue rent and a growing suspicion that police were closing in on him 234 Bundy stole a car and fled Tallahassee driving westward across the Florida Panhandle . Three days later at around 1:00 a.m. he was stopped by Pensacola police officer David Lee near the Alabama state line after a wants and warrants check showed his Volkswagen Beetle was stolen. 235 When told he was under arrest Bundy kicked Lees legs out from under him and took off running. Lee fired two warning shots then gave chase and tackled him. The two struggled over Lees gun before the officer finally subdued and arrested Bundy. 236 In the stolen vehicle were three sets of IDs belonging to female FSU students 21 stolen credit cards and a stolen television set. 237 Also found were a pair of dark-rimmed non-prescription glasses and a pair of plaid slacks later identified as the disguise worn by Richard Burton Fire Department in Jacksonville. 238 As Lee transported his suspect to jail unaware that he had just arrested one of the FBIs Ten Most Wanted Fugitives he heard Bundy say I wish you had killed me. 239 Subsequent trials marriage Bundy departing a preliminary hearing Miami 1979 Following a change of venue to Miami Bundy stood trial for the Chi Omega homicides and assaults in June 1979. 240 The trial was covered by 250 reporters from five continents and was the first to be televised nationally in the United States. 241 Despite the presence of five court-appointed attorneys Bundy again handled much of his own defense . From the beginning he sabotaged the entire defense effort out of spite distrust and grandiose delusion Nelson later wrote. Ted was facing murder charges with a possible death sentence and all that mattered to him apparently was that he be in charge. 242 According to Mike Minerva a Tallahassee public defender and member of the defense team a pre-trial plea bargain was negotiated in which Bundy would plead guilty to killing Levy Bowman and Leach in exchange for a firm 75-year prison sentence. Prosecutors were amenable to a deal by one account because prospects of losing at trial were very good. 243 Bundy on the other hand saw the plea bargain not only as a means of avoiding the death penalty but also as a tactical move : he could enter his plea then wait a few years for evidence to disintegrate or become lost and for witnesses to die move on or retract their testimony. Once the case against him had deteriorated beyond repair he could file a post-conviction motion to set aside the plea and secure an acquittal. 244 245 At the last minute however Bundy refused the deal. It made him realize he was going to have to stand up in front of the whole world and say he was guilty Minerva said. He just couldnt do it. 246 Odontologist Richard Souviron explaining bite mark evidence at the Chi Omega trial in May 1979. At trial crucial testimony came from Chi Omega sorority members Connie Hastings who placed Bundy in the vicinity of the sorority house that evening 247 and Nita Neary who saw him leaving the house clutching the murder weapon. 248 249 Incriminating physical evidence included impressions of the bite wounds Bundy had inflicted on Levys left buttock which forensic odontologists Richard Souviron and Lowell Levine matched to castings of Bundys teeth. 250 251 The jury was also allowed to hear details of DaRonchs previously kidnapping and finally deliberated for less than seven hours before convicting Bundy on July 24 1979 of the Bowman and Levy murders three counts of attempted first-degree murder for the assaults on Kleiner Chandler and Thomas and two counts of burglary. Trial judge Edward Cowart imposed death sentences for the murder convictions. 252 253 Six months later a second trial took place in Orlando for the abduction and murder of Leach. 254 Bundy was found guilty once again after less than eight hours deliberation due principally to the testimony of an eyewitness who saw him leading Leach from the schoolyard to his stolen van. 255 Important material evidence included clothing fibers with an unusual manufacturing error found in the van and on Leachs body which matched fibers from the jacket Bundy was wearing when he was arrested. 256 During the penalty phase of the Leach trial Bundy took advantage of an obscure Florida law providing that a marriage declaration in court in the presence of a judge constituted a legal marriage. As he was questioning Boonewho had moved to Florida to be near Bundy had testified on his behalf during both trials and was again testifying on his behalf as a character witnesshe asked her to marry him. She accepted and Bundy declared to the court that they were legally married. 257 258 On February 10 1980 Bundy was sentenced for a third time to death by electrocution. 259 As the sentence was announced he reportedly stood and shouted Tell the jury they were wrong! 260 This third death sentence would be the one ultimately carried out nearly nine years later. Louise was the only one which begged for mercy. 261 On October 24 1982 Boone gave birth to a daughter Rose Bundy. 262 263 264 While conjugal visits were not allowed at the Florida State Prison in Raiford where Bundy was incarcerated inmates were known to pool their money in order to bribe guards to allow them intimate time alone with their female visitors. 263 265 Death row confessions and execution Shortly after the conclusion of the Leach trial and the beginning of the long appeals process that followed Bundy initiated a series of interviews with Stephen Michaud and Hugh Aynesworth. Speaking mostly in third person to avoid the stigma of confession he began for the first time to divulge details of his crimes and thought processes. 266 Bundy recounted his career as a thief confirming Kloepfers long-time suspicion that he had shoplifted virtually everything of substance that he owned. 267 The big payoff for me he said was actually possessing whatever it was I had stolen. I really enjoyed having something ... that I had wanted and gone out and taken. Possession proved to be an important motive for rape and murder as well. 268 Sexual assault he said fulfilled his need to totally possess his victims. 269 At first he killed his victims as a matter of expediency ... to eliminate the possibility of being caught ; but later murder became part of the adventure. The ultimate possession was in fact the taking of the life he said. And then ... the physical possession of the remains. 270 Bundy also confided in Special Agent William Hagmaier of the FBI Behavioral Analysis Unit . Hagmaier was struck by the deep almost mystical satisfaction that Bundy took in murder. He said that after a while murder is not just a crime of lust or violence Hagmaier related. It becomes possession. They are part of you ... the victim becomes a part of you and you two are forever one ... and the grounds where you kill them or leave them become sacred to you and you will always be drawn back to them. Bundy told Hagmaier that he considered himself to be an amateur an impulsive killer in his early years before moving into what he termed his prime or predator phase at about the time of Healys murder in 1974. This implied that he began killing well before 1974although he never explicitly admitted having done so. 271 Bundy mugshot after his sentencing for the murder of Leach February 1980 In July 1984 prison guards found two hacksaw blades hidden in Bundys cell. A steel bar in one of the cells windows had been sawed completely through at the top and bottom and glued back into place with a homemade soap-based adhesive. 272 273 Several months later guards found an unauthorized mirror and Bundy was moved to a different cell. 274 Shortly thereafter he was charged with a disciplinary infraction for unauthorized correspondence with another high-profile criminal John Hinckley Jr. 275 In October 1984 Bundy contacted Keppel and offered to share his self-proclaimed expertise in serial killer psychology 274 in the ongoing hunt in Washington for the Green River Killer later identified as Gary Ridgway . 276 Keppel and Green River Task Force Detective Dave Reichert interviewed Bundy but Ridgway remained at large for a further seventeen years. 277 Keppel published a detailed documentation of the Green River interviews 278 and later collaborated with Michaud on another examination of the interview material. 279 280 In early 1986 an execution date March 4 was set on the Chi Omega convictions; the U.S. Supreme Court issued a brief stay but the execution was quickly rescheduled. 281 In April shortly after the new date July 2 was announced Bundy finally confessed to Hagmaier and Nelson what they believed was the full range of his depredations including details of what he did to some of his victims after their deaths. He told them that he revisited Taylor Mountain Issaquah and other secondary crime scenes often several times to lie with his victims and perform sexual acts with their bodies until putrefaction forced him to stop. In some cases he drove for several hours each way and remained the entire night. 159 In Utah he applied makeup to Smiths lifeless face and repeatedly washed Aimes hair. If youve got time he told Hagmaier they can be anything you want them to be. 145 Bundy decapitated approximately twelve of his victims with a hacksaw 44 282 and kept at least one group of severed headsprobably the four later found on Taylor Mountain Rancourt Parks Ball and Healyin his apartment for a period of time before disposing of them. 283 Less than fifteen hours before the scheduled July 2 execution the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals stayed it indefinitely and remanded the Chi Omega case for review on multiple technicalitiesincluding Bundys mental competency to stand trial and an erroneous instruction by the trial judge during the penalty phase requiring the jury to break a 66 tie between life imprisonment and the death penalty 284 which ultimately were never resolved. 285 A new date November 18 was then set to carry out the Leach sentence; the Eleventh Circuit Court issued a stay on November 17. 285 In mid-1988 the Eleventh Circuit ruled against Bundy and in December the Supreme Court denied a motion to review the ruling over the dissents of Justices Thurgood Marshall and William J. Brennan Jr. 286 Within hours of that final denial a firm execution date of January 24 1989 was announced. 287 Bundys journey through the appeals courts had been unusually rapid for a capital murder case: Contrary to popular belief the courts moved Bundy as fast as they could ... Even the prosecutors acknowledged that Bundys lawyers never employed delaying tactics. Though people everywhere seethed at the apparent delay in executing the archdemon Ted Bundy was actually on the fast track. 288 With all appeal avenues exhausted and no further motivation to deny his crimes Bundy agreed to speak frankly with investigators. He confessed to Keppel that he had committed all eight of the Washington and Oregon homicides for which he was the prime suspect . He described three additional previously unknown victims in Washington and two in Oregon whom he declined to identify if indeed he ever knew their identities. 289 He said he left a fifth corpseMansonson Taylor Mountain 290 but incinerated her head in Kloepfers fireplace. 291 He described the Issaquah crime scene where the bones of Ott Naslund and Hawkins were found and it was almost like he was just there Keppel said. Like he was seeing everything. He was infatuated with the idea because he spent so much time there. He is just totally consumed with murder all the time. 292 Nelsons impressions were similar: It was the absolute misogyny of his crimes that stunned me she wrote his manifest rage against women. He had no compassion at all ... he was totally engrossed in the details. His murders were his lifes accomplishments. 177 Bundy confessed to detectives from Idaho Utah and Colorado that he had committed numerous additional homicides including several that were unknown to the police. He explained that when he was in Utah he could bring his victims back to his apartment where he could reenact scenarios depicted on the covers of detective magazines. 44 A new ulterior strategy quickly became apparent: he withheld many details hoping to parlay the incomplete information into yet another stay of execution. Despite warnings from his appellate attorneys that the spectacle of peddling information for time would turn the courts against Bundy Bundy began offering investigators piecemeal information regarding some of his murders. There are other buried remains in Colorado he admitted but he refused to elaborate. 293 294 The new strategyimmediately dubbed Teds bones-for-time scheme served only to deepen the resolve of authorities to see Bundy executed on schedule and yielded little new detailed information. 295 In cases where he did give details nothing was found. 296 Colorado Detective Matt Lindvall interpreted this as a conflict between his desire to postpone his execution by divulging information and his need to remain in total possessionthe only person who knew his victims true resting places. 297 When it became clear that no further stays would be forthcoming from the courts Bundy supporters began lobbying for the only remaining option executive clemency . Diana Weiner a young Florida attorney and Bundys last purported love interest 298 asked the families of several Colorado and Utah victims to petition Florida Governor Bob Martinez for a postponement to give Bundy time to reveal more information. 299 All refused. 300 The families already believed that the victims were dead and that Ted had killed them wrote Nelson. They didnt need his confession. 301 Martinez made it clear that he would not agree to further delays in any case. We are not going to have the system manipulated he told reporters. For him to be negotiating for his life over the bodies of victims is despicable. 302 Boone had championed Bundys innocence throughout all of his trials and felt deeply betrayed by his admission that he was in fact guilty. She moved back to Washington with her daughter and refused to accept his phone call on the morning of his execution. She was hurt by his relationship with Diana Weiner Nelson wrote and devastated by his sudden wholesale confessions in his last days. 303 Hagmaier was present during Bundys final interviews with investigators. On the eve of his execution he talked of suicide . He did not want to give the state the satisfaction of watching him die Hagmaier said. 246 Bundy rejected his last food 304 and was executed in the Raiford electric chair at 7:16 a.m. EST on Tuesday January 24 1989. His last words were directed at his attorney Jim Coleman and Methodist minister Fred Lawrence: Jim and Fred Id like you to give my love to my family and friends. 305 Hundreds of revelers sang danced and set off fireworks in a pasture across from the prison as the execution was carried out 306 307 then cheered as the white hearse containing Bundys corpse departed the prison. 308 He was cremated in Gainesville 309 and his ashes were scattered at an undisclosed location in the Cascade Range of Washington State in accordance with his will . 310 311 Modus operandi and victim profiles Bundy was an unusually organized and calculating criminal who used his extensive knowledge of law enforcement methodologies to elude identification and capture for years. 312 His crime scenes were distributed over large geographic areas; his victim count had risen to at least 20 before it became clear that numerous investigators in widely disparate jurisdictions were hunting the same man. 313 Bundys assault methods of choice were blunt trauma and strangulation two relatively silent techniques that could be accomplished with common household items. 314 He deliberately avoided firearms due to the noise they made and the ballistic evidence they left behind. 315 He was a meticulous researcher who explored his surroundings in minute detail looking for safe sites to seize and dispose of victims. 316 He was unusually skilled at minimizing physical evidence. 77 Bundys fingerprints were never found at a crime scene nor any other incontrovertible evidence of his guilt a fact he repeated often during the years in which he attempted to maintain his innocence. 317 Bundy in a Miami courtroom in 1979 Other significant obstacles for law enforcement were Bundys generic essentially anonymous physical features 318 and a curious chameleon -like ability to change his appearance. 319 Early on police complained of the futility of showing his photograph to witnesses; he looked different in virtually every photo ever taken of him. 320 In person his expression would so change his whole appearance that there were moments that you werent even sure you were looking at the same person said Stewart Hanson Jr. the judge in the DaRonch trial. He was really a changeling. 321 Bundy was well aware of this unusual quality and he exploited it using subtle modifications of facial hair or hairstyle to significantly alter his appearance as necessary. 322 He concealed his one distinctive identifying mark a dark mole on his neck with turtleneck shirts and sweaters. 323 Even his Volkswagen Beetle proved difficult to pin down; its color was variously described by witnesses as metallic or non-metallic tan or bronze light brown or dark brown. 324 Bundys modus operandi evolved in organization and sophistication over time as is typical of serial killers according to FBI experts. 44 Early on it consisted of forcible late-night entry followed by a violent attack with a blunt weapon on a sleeping victim. 325 As his methodology evolved he became progressively more organized in his choice of victims and crime scenes. He would employ various ruses designed to lure his victim to the vicinity of his vehicle where he had pre-positioned a weapon usually a crowbar. In many cases he wore a plaster cast on one leg or a sling on one arm and sometimes hobbled on crutches then requested assistance in carrying something to his vehicle. Bundy was regarded as handsome and charismatic traits he exploited to win the confidence of his victims and the people around him in his daily life. 116 326 327 Ted lured females Michaud wrote the way a lifeless silk flower can dupe a honey bee. 328 He would sometimes approach females pretending to be an authority figure or firefighter. 329 Once Bundy had victims near or inside his vehicle he would overpower and bludgeon them and then restrain them with handcuffs. He would then transport them to a pre-selected secondary site often a considerable distance away and rape them during ligature strangulation . 44 120 330 In the case of his Utah victims the secondary site would be his apartment building. 44 Toward the end of his spree in Florida perhaps under the stress of being a fugitive he regressed to indiscriminate attacks on sleeping women. 330 While he is often said to have been a torturer and biographer Ann Rule in particular regarded him as a sadistic sociopath who took pleasure in human suffering 5 Bundy disputed these claims in one of his conversations with Michaud insisting that he never deliberately tortured any of those he killed and that the murders had no sadistic focus on enjoyment derived from the infliction of pain and injury. To the contrary he claimed that he went out of his way to mitigate his victims physical torment. 331 Though he also told Hagmaier that he would pose his victims to recreate detective magazine covers. 44 120 At secondary sites Bundy would remove and later burn the victims clothing 332 or in at least one case Cunninghams deposit them in a Goodwill Industries collection bin. 333 He explained that the clothing removal was ritualistic but also a practical matter as it minimized the chance of leaving trace evidence at the crime scene that could implicate him. 332 A manufacturing error in fibers from his own clothing ironically provided a crucial incriminating link to the Leach killing. 334 He often revisited his secondary crime scenes to engage in acts of necrophilia 335 and to groom or dress up the cadavers. 336 Some victims were found wearing articles of clothing they had never worn or nail polish that family members had never seen. 337 Bundy took Polaroid photos of many of his victims. When you work hard to do something right he told Hagmaier you dont want to forget it. 145 Consumption of large quantities of alcohol was an essential component he told both Keppel and Michaud; he needed to be extremely drunk while on the prowl 338 339 in order to significantly diminish his inhibitions and to sedate the dominant personality that he feared might prevent his inner entity from acting on his impulses. 340 All of Bundys known victims were white females most of middle-class backgrounds. Almost all were between the ages of 15 and 25 and most were college students. He apparently never approached anyone he might have met before. 312 In their last conversation before his execution Bundy told Kloepfer he had purposely stayed away from her when he felt the power of his sickness building in him. 341 Rule noted that most of the identified victims had long straight hair parted in the middlelike Edwards the woman who rejected him and to whom he later became engaged and then rejected in return. Rule speculated that Bundys animosity toward his first girlfriend triggered his protracted rampage and caused him to target victims who resembled her. 342 Bundy dismissed this hypothesis: They ... just fit the general criteria of being young and attractive he told Aynesworth. Too many people have bought this crap that all the girls were similar ... but almost everything was dissimilar ... physically they were almost all different. 343 He did concede that youth and beauty were absolutely indispensable criteria in his choice of victims. 344 After Bundys execution Rule was surprised and troubled to hear from numerous sensitive intelligent kind young women who wrote or called to say they were deeply depressed because Bundy was dead. Many had corresponded with him each believing that she was his only one . Several said they suffered nervous breakdowns when he died. Even in death Ted damaged women Rule wrote. To get well they must realize that they were conned by the master con-man. They are grieving for a shadow man that never existed. 345 Pathology Bundy mugshot after conviction for Chi Omega murders August 1979 Bundy underwent multiple psychiatric examinations; the experts conclusions varied. Dorothy Otnow Lewis a professor of psychiatry at the New York University School of Medicine and an authority on violent behavior initially made a diagnosis of bipolar disorder 346 but later changed her impression more than once. 5 347 She also suggested the possibility of a multiple personality disorder based on behaviors described in interviews and court testimony; a great-aunt witnessed an episode during which Bundy seemed to turn into another unrecognizable person ... she suddenly inexplicably found herself afraid of her favorite nephew as they waited together at a dusk-darkened train station. He had turned into a stranger. 24 Lewis recounted a prison official in Tallahassee describing a similar transformation: He said He became weird on me. He did a metamorphosis a body and facial change and he felt there was almost an odor emitting from him. He said Almost a complete change of personality ... that was the day I was afraid of him. 348 While experts found Bundys precise diagnosis elusive the majority of evidence pointed away from bipolar disorder or other psychoses 349 and toward antisocial personality disorder ASPD. 350 Bundy displayed many personality traits typically found in ASPD patients such as outward charm and charisma with little true personality or genuine insight beneath the facade; 351 the ability to distinguish right from wrong but with minimal effect on behavior; 352 353 and an absence of guilt or remorse. 351 Guilt doesnt solve anything really Bundy said in 1981. It hurts you ... I guess I am in the enviable position of not having to deal with guilt. 354 There was also evidence of narcissism poor judgment and manipulative behavior. Upon assessment using the Psychopathy Checklistrevised PCL-R Bundy was reportedly evaluated as 3940. 355 Prosecutor George Dekle wrote Sociopaths are egotistical manipulators who think they can con anybody. 356 Sometimes he manipulates even me admitted one psychiatrist. 357 In the end Lewis agreed with the majority: I always tell my graduate students that if they can find me a real true psychopath Ill buy them dinner she told Nelson. I never thought they existed ... but I think Ted may have been one a true psychopath without any remorse or empathy at all. 358 Narcissistic personality disorder NPD and its subtype malignant narcissism have both been proposed as alternative diagnoses in at least one subsequent retrospective analysis. 359 360 On the afternoon before he was executed Bundy granted a videotaped interview to James Dobson a psychologist and founder of the Christian evangelical organization Focus on the Family . 361 He used the opportunity to make new claims about violence in the media and the pornographic roots of his crimes. It happened in stages gradually he said. My experience with ... pornography that deals on a violent level with sexuality is once you become addicted to it ... I would keep looking for more potent more explicit more graphic kinds of material. Until you reach a point where the pornography only goes so far ... where you begin to wonder if maybe actually doing it would give that which is beyond just reading it or looking at it. 362 Violence in the media he said particularly sexualized violence sent boys down the road to being Ted Bundys. 363 The FBI he suggested should stake out adult movie houses and follow patrons as they leave. 8 You are going to kill me he said and that will protect society from me. But out there are many many more people who are addicted to pornography and you are doing nothing about that. 363 While Nelson was apparently convinced that Bundys concern was genuine 8 most biographers 364 365 366 researchers 367 and other observers 368 have concluded that his sudden condemnation of pornography was one last manipulative attempt to shift blame by catering to Dobsons agenda as a longtime pornography critic. 369 He told Dobson that true crime detective magazines had corrupted him and fueled his fantasies ... to the point of becoming a serial killer ; yet in a 1977 letter to Rule he wrote Who in the world reads these publications? ... I have never purchased such a magazine and on only two or three occasions have I ever picked one up. 370 He told Michaud and Aynsworth in 1980 and Hagmaier the night before he spoke to Dobson that pornography played a negligible role in his development as a serial killer. 371 The problem wasnt pornography wrote Dekle. The problem was Bundy. 372 I wish I could believe that his motives were altruistic wrote Rule. But all I can see in that Dobson tape is another Ted Bundy manipulation of our minds. The effect of the tape is to place once again the onus of his crimes not on himself but on us. 365 Hagmaier and Bundy during their final death row interview on the eve of Bundys execution January 23 1989 Rule and Aynesworth both noted that for Bundy the fault always lay with someone or something else. While he eventually confessed to 30 murders he never accepted responsibility for any of them even when offered that opportunity prior to the Chi Omega trial which would have spared him the death penalty. 373 He deflected blame onto a wide variety of scapegoats including his abusive grandfather the absence of his biological father the concealment of his true parentage by his mother alcohol the media the police whom he accused of planting evidence society in general violence on television and ultimately true crime periodicals and pornography. 374 He blamed television programming which he watched mostly on sets that he had stolen for brainwashing him into stealing credit cards. 375 On at least one occasion he even tried to blame his victims : I have known people who ... radiate vulnerability he wrote in a 1977 letter to Kloepfer. Their facial expressions say I am afraid of you. These people invite abuse ... By expecting to be hurt do they subtly encourage it? 376 Another significant element of delusion permeated Bundys thinking: Bundy was always surprised when anyone noticed that one of his victims was missing because he imagined America to be a place where everyone is invisible except to themselves. And he was always astounded when people testified that they had seen him in incriminating places because Bundy did not believe people noticed each other. 377 I dont know why everyone is out to get me Bundy complained to Lewis. He really and truly did not have any sense of the enormity of what he had done she said. 371 A long-term serial killer erects powerful barriers to his guilt Keppel wrote walls of denial that can sometimes never be breached. 378 Nelson agreed. Each time he was forced to make an actual confession she wrote he had to leap a steep barrier he had built inside himself long ago. 379 Victims Confirmed The night before his execution Bundy confessed to 30 homicides but the true total remains unknown and Bundy occasionally made cryptic comments to encourage speculation. 316 He told Aynesworth in 1980 that for every murder publicized there could be one that was not. 380 When FBI agents proposed a total tally of 36 Bundy responded Add one digit to that and youll have it. 381 Years later he told Nelson that the common estimate of 35 was accurate 316 but Keppel wrote that Ted and I both knew the total was much higher. 76 In an interview Keppel stated his belief that Bundy had killed at least 50 and maybe 75. 382 John Henry Browne a lawyer for Bundy would later claim that the first person he killed was a young boy when they were playing some kind of sex game in the woods. And so he must have been only 12 13 14. 383 Browne also said that Ted told me in that interview that he killed over 100 people. 384 I told Ted Bundy that we now have the evidence to charge him with both cases Leon County Sheriff Kenneth Katsaris recalled referring to the Chi Omega murders and the slaying of Leach. He looked at me and said When you find the person that committed these crimes that you think I committed that person is going to be wanted for murders of women in the three digits in six states. 385 I dont think even he knew ... how many he killed or why he killed them said Reverend Fred Lawrence the Methodist clergyman who administered Bundys last rites . That was my impression my strong impression. 386 On the evening before his execution Bundy reviewed his victim tally with Hagmaier on a state-by-state basis for a total of 30 homicides: 282 in Washington 11 including Parks abducted in Oregon but killed in Washington; and including 3 unidentified in Utah 8 3 unidentified in Colorado 3 in Florida 3 in Oregon 2 both unidentified in Idaho 2 1 unidentified in California 1 unidentified 1974 Washington Oregon January 4: Karen Sparks 18 Bludgeoned and sexually assaulted in her bed as she slept in the University District of Seattle; 387 survived but the extent of her injuries resulted in permanent brain damage. 82 79 February 1: Lynda Ann Healy 21 Bludgeoned while asleep and abducted from her basement bedroom in Seattle and was then decapitated and dismembered post-mortem; 84 mandible recovered at Taylor Mountain site in 1975. 127 March 12: Donna Gail Manson 19 Abducted while walking to a concert at Evergreen State College; body left according to Bundy at Taylor Mountain site but never found. 290 However there is speculation that the partial remains of an unidentified female discovered near Eatonville Washington on August 29 1978 could have belonged to Manson. Remains and clothing were reportedly destroyed on May 10 1985 before a positive forensic identification could be made. 388 389 April 17: Susan Elaine Rancourt 18 Disappeared after attending an evening advisors meeting at Central Washington State College; 89 90 skull and mandible recovered at Taylor Mountain site in 1975. Both had been severely fractured. 127 May 6: Roberta Kathleen Parks 22 Vanished from Oregon State University in Corvallis Oregon; skull and mandible recovered at Taylor Mountain site in 1975. She had been bludgeoned to death. 127 June 1: Brenda Carol Ball 22 Disappeared after leaving the Flame Tavern in Burien and was last seen in the parking lot talking to a man with his arm in a sling; 92 skull and mandible recovered at Taylor Mountain site in 1975. Her skull had been fractured. 127 June 11: Georgann Hawkins 18 97 Abducted from an alley behind her sorority house; 98 skeletal remains identified by Bundy as those of Hawkins recovered at Issaquah site. Hawkins remains listed as a missing person. 126 390 Georgann Hawkins July 14: Janice Ann Ott 23 Abducted from Lake Sammamish State Park in broad daylight and was last seen leaving the park with Bundy who had asked her for assistance with putting his sailboat on his car; 116 skeletal remains recovered at Issaquah site in 1974. 125 July 14: Denise Marie Naslund 19 Abducted four hours after Ott from Lake Sammamish State Park and was last seen walking towards the restrooms; 117 skeletal remains recovered at Issaquah site in 1974. 125 Utah October 1: Nancy Wilcox 16 Last seen leaving her home at 9:00 pm in Holladay Utah after getting into an argument with her father; 134 body buried according to Bundy near Capitol Reef National Park 200 miles 320 km south of Salt Lake City but never found. 137 October 18: Melissa Anne Smith 17 Vanished from Midvale Utah after leaving a pizza parlor to walk back to her home; body found nine days later on a hillside in Summit Park Utah. Her head had been severely beaten with a crowbar and her body had been battered before death. 138 October 31: Laura Ann Aime 17 Disappeared from Lehi Utah on her way home from a Halloween party; body discovered by hikers in American Fork Canyon. Her face was beaten beyond recognition and she had been strangled and sexually assaulted. 142 November 8: Carol DaRonch 18 Picked up from the Fashion Place shopping mall in Murray Utah lured by Bundys guise of claiming to be a police officer investigating vehicle break-ins in the parking lot; she escaped by jumping out of Bundys vehicle after he inadvertently fastened a pair of handcuffs on the same wrist. 147 November 8: Debra Jean Kent 17 Vanished after leaving a school play in Bountiful Utah; body left according to Bundy near Fairview 100 miles 160 km south of Bountiful; one patella was found which was positively identified by DNA as Kents in 2015. 187 391 1975 Utah Colorado Idaho January 12: Caryn Eileen Campbell 23 Disappeared from a hotel hallway in Snowmass Village Colorado; 155 body discovered on a dirt road near the hotel with skull fractures and knife wounds on February 17. 156 March 15: Julie Lyle Cunningham 26 Disappeared from Vail Colorado after she left her apartment in the Apollo Park neighborhood to visit a local tavern; 157 body buried according to Bundy near Rifle 90 miles 140 km west of Vail but never found. 392 April 6: Denise Lynn Oliverson 24 Abducted while cycling to her parents house in Grand Junction Colorado; 160 body thrown according to Bundy into the Colorado River 5 miles 8.0 km west of Grand Junction 393 but never found. 394 May 6: Lynette Dawn Culver 12 Abducted from Pocatello Idaho after she left Alameda Junior High School for her lunch break; 161 body thrown according to Bundy into what authorities believe to be the Snake River but never found. 162 June 28: Susan Curtis 15 Disappeared during a youth conference at Brigham Young University when she left her friends to walk back to her dormitory and brush her teeth; 166 body buried according to Bundy along a highway near Price 75 miles 121 km southeast of Provo but never found. 395 1978 Lisa Levy and Margaret Bowman Florida January 15: Margaret Elizabeth Bowman 21 Bludgeoned and strangled as she slept at the Chi Omega sorority at Florida State University no secondary crime scene. 396 January 15: Lisa Janet Levy 20 Bludgeoned strangled bitten and sexually assaulted as she slept at the Chi Omega sorority at Florida State University no secondary crime scene. 396 January 15: Karen Chandler 21 Bludgeoned as she slept at the Chi Omega sorority; survived although her skull was fractured and her jaw right arm and fingers were crushed. 396 January 15: Kathy Kleiner 21 Bludgeoned as she slept at the Chi Omega sorority resulting in her jaw being shattered and her right cheek being ripped open; survived. 396 January 15: Cheryl Thomas 21 Bludgeoned as she slept eight blocks from Chi Omega; survived after having a fractured jaw and skull which left her with permanent deafness in her left ear and equilibrium damage. 396 February 9: Kimberly Dianne Leach 12 Abducted from Lake City Junior High School in Lake City Florida and was last seen being led to a white van by a man who was later identified as Bundy; 8 mummified remains found near Suwannee River State Park 43 miles 69 km west of Lake City with homicidal violence about the neck region. 230 Unconfirmed Bundy remains a suspect in several unsolved homicides and disappearances and is likely responsible for others that may never be identified; in 1987 he confided to Keppel that there were some murders that he would never talk about because they were committed too close to home too close to family or involved victims who were very young . 397 Minutes before his execution Hagmaier queried Bundy about unsolved homicides in New Jersey Vermont Illinois Texas and Florida. Bundy provided directionslater proven inaccurateto Curtis burial site in Utah but denied involvement in any of the open cases. 398 In 2011 Bundys complete DNA profile obtained from a vial of his blood found in an evidence vault was added to the FBIs DNA database for future reference in these and other unsolved murder cases: 399 Ann Marie Burr 8 vanished from her Tacoma residence on August 31 1961 400 when Bundy was aged 14. An unknown tennis shoe imprint was found by the overturned bench used to enter her house. Due to the small size of the shoe police believed the perpetrator was a teenager or youth. 401 The Burr house was on Bundys newspaper delivery route and Burrs father was certain that he saw Bundy in a ditch at a construction site on the nearby UPS campus the morning his daughter disappeared. 402 73 403 Other circumstantial evidence implicates Bundy as well but detectives familiar with the case have never agreed on the likelihood of his involvement. 73 403 Bundy repeatedly denied culpability and wrote a letter of denial to the Burr family in 1986. 404 However Keppel has observed that the Burr case fits all three categories of murders Bundy would never talk about : too close to home too close to family and very young. 397 Forensic testing of material evidence from the Burr crime scene in 2011 yielded insufficient intact DNA sequences for comparison with Bundys and as such his involvement remains speculative. 405 Flight attendants Lisa Wick and Lonnie Ree Trumbull both 20 were bludgeoned with a piece of lumber as they slept in their basement apartment in Seattles Queen Anne neighborhood in the early morning hours of June 23 1966. 406 An autopsy concluded that Trumbull had died at approximately midnight from a blow to the head she had received about an hour earlier. In retrospect Keppel noted many similarities to the Chi Omega crime scene. 407 The crime was also similarly comparable to Bundys earlier verifiable assaults on women who were bludgeoned while in their beds in Seattle basement apartments. Wick who suffered permanent memory loss as a result of the attack later contacted Rule: I know that it was Ted Bundy who did that to us she wrote but I cant tell you how I know. 408 Police records state that when Bundys fingerprints were compared in January 1977 to those left at the crime scene they did not match although many people were allowed into the unsecured crime scene and may have left their fingerprints thereby causing unwanted alteration of evidence. Bundys involvement remains unconfirmed. 409 Vacationing Pennsylvania college friends Susan Margarite Davis and Elizabeth Potter Perry both 19 were stabbed to death in Somers Point New Jersey on May 30 1969. 71 The women had been visiting Ocean City and were on their way back to Pennsylvania at about 4:30 a.m. before they stopped at the Somers Point Diner for breakfast. They left the diner one hour later and vanished. Their car was found that day abandoned beside the Garden State Parkway near Atlantic City 60 miles 97 km southeast of Philadelphia; their bodies were discovered in nearby woods three days later tied to trees with their hair. 410 Davis was naked with her clothing and accessories in a pile beside her. Except for her missing underwear Perry was fully-dressed. Bundy attended Temple University from January through May 1969 and apparently did not move west until after Memorial Day weekend. While his accounts of his earliest crimes varied considerably between interviews he told forensic psychologist Art Norman that his first murder victims were two women in the Philadelphia area. 71 Biographer Richard Larsen believed that Bundy committed the murders using his feigned-injury ruse based on an investigators interview with Bundys aunt: Ted she said was wearing a leg cast due to an automobile accident on the weekend of the homicides and therefore could not have traveled from Philadelphia to the Jersey Shore ; there is no official record of any such accident. 411 Bundy is considered a strong suspect but the case remains open. 411 Rita Patricia Curran a 24-year-old elementary school teacher and part-time motel maid was murdered in her basement apartment on July 19 1971 in Burlington Vermont; she had been strangled bludgeoned and raped. 412 The time of death was later given as approximately midnight. The location of the motel where she worked which was adjacent to Bundys birthplace the Elizabeth Lund Home for Unwed Mothers and similarities to known Bundy crime scenes led retired FBI agent John Bassett to propose him as a suspect. 413 Bundy told Keppel that he murdered a young woman in 1971 in Burlington when he was there to obtain information about his birth 414 but denied specific involvement in the Curran case to Hagmaier on the eve of his execution. 398 No evidence firmly places Bundy in Burlington on that date but municipal records note that a person named Bundy was bitten by a dog that week 415 and long stretches of Bundys timeincluding the summer of 1971remain unaccounted for. 44 416 In 2023 the Burlington Police Department announced that Currans killer was her next-door neighbor who had been identified using DNA extracted from a discarded cigarette butt found at the crime scene. 417 Joyce Margaret LePage 21 was last seen on the evening of July 22 1971 when friends dropped her off at her apartment on the campus of Washington State University WSU where she was an undergraduate. Later her vehicle was discovered by police parked four blocks from her residence. Nine months later LePages skeletal remains were found wrapped in two military blankets bound with rope in a deep ravine south of Pullman Washington . Her remains were also covered with a sizable piece of green shag carpet that had been previously reported missing from Stevens Hall a womens residence on the WSU campus which was vacant and undergoing renovations in the summer of 1971. The cause of her death was confirmed to be three knife wounds to her chest which was determined during an FBI forensic examination of her bones. Police concluded from the available evidence that she had been stabbed to death in Stevens Hall before being wrapped in carpet and taken to the ravine. 418 Whitman County authorities have said that multiple suspectsincluding Bundyhave never been cleared. 419 Kerry May-Hardy 22 disappeared whilst hitchhiking on June 13 1972 from Woodland Park Seattle . 420 421 Hardys skeletal remains were unearthed on September 6 2010 by construction machinery in a grave measuring two feet 0.6 meters in depth. 422 423 DNA from the skeleton matched the familys sample on June 1 2011. Hardys body was discovered five miles from Bundys mass grave at Taylor Mountain and she is known to have shared a mutual acquaintance with Bundy although it is uncertain if they actually knew each other. 424 The case remains unsolved. 425 In 1989 Bundy confessed to two homicides in Oregon without identifying the victims. Oregon law enforcement subsequently identified Bundy as a prime suspect in the 1973 disappearances of Vicki Lynn Hollar aged 24 426 who disappeared from Eugene on August 20 and Suzanne Rae Justis aged 23 who was last seen in Portland on November 5. 427 428 Hollar was last seen getting into her car at a parking lot en route to her apartment. 426 Justis was last heard from when she telephoned her parents from outside the Veterans Memorial Coliseum . 429 Bundy was linked to the cases due to the fact that Hollar and Justis both fitted his preferred victim profile and he was known to have been in the area at the time they disappeared. 427 Another possible victim identified by detectives was 17-year-old Rita Lorraine Jolly who disappeared from West Linn on June 29 1973 after leaving her residence on Horton Road to go for a walk. Jolly was last seen between 8:30 and 9:00 p.m. walking uphill on Sunset Avenue. 430 Authorities were unable to obtain an interview with Bundy and all three women remain classified as missing . 431 Katherine Merry Devine aged 14 was abducted on November 25 1973; her body was found the following month in the Capitol State Forest near Olympia Washington. 432 Brenda Joy Baker also aged 14 was last seen hitchhiking near Puyallup on May 27 1974; her body was found in Millersylvania State Park a month later. 419 433 Her throat had been slit. Though Bundy was widely believed responsible for both murders he told Keppel that he had no knowledge of either case. 434 435 DNA analysis led to the arrest and conviction of William Cosden for Devines murder in 2002. 432 The Baker homicide remains unsolved although Cosden is also considered the prime suspect in her case. 432 Sandra Jean Weaver 19 a Wisconsin native who had been living in Tooele Utah was last seen leaving the Warehouse District in Salt Lake City for her lunch break at around 10:30 a.m. on July 1 1974. Her nude body was discovered the following day by tourists hiking in De Beque by the Colorado River near Grand Junction Colorado. 436 She had been sexually assaulted and stranguled to death before being dumped off a service road. 437 Salt Lake County Sheriffs Detective Jerry Thompson later stated that Weavers case was very similar to the subsequent deaths of Smith and Aime. However Weavers murder officially remains unsolved. 438 21-year-old University of Utah student Rhonda Stapley was waiting at a bus stop in Salt Lake City on October 11 1974 when she was allegedly approached by Bundy who had pulled over and offered her a ride in his Volkswagen Beetle. 439 After entering his vehicle Bundy drove to an isolated canyon picnic spot shut off the engine turned to her and said: Do you know what? I am going to kill you now. 440 He then repeatedly choked and raped Stapley over a period of three hours until Bundy who thought she was dead was distracted by something near his car and she was able to run into the woods. 441 Although Stapley would not publicly acknowledge the incident until 2011 her account was supported by Ann Rule who said that it was consistent with the FBIs timeline of Bundys activities in 1974. 442 Melanie Suzanne Cooley 18 disappeared on April 15 1975 after leaving Nederland High School in Nederland Colorado 50 miles 80 km northwest of Denver. She was last seen by classmates hitchhiking nearby after her classes were over. 443 Her corpse was discovered by road maintenance workers two weeks later in Coal Creek Canyon 20 miles 32 km away from where she was last seen. Gas station receipts place Bundy in nearby Golden on the day Cooley disappeared. 444 Jefferson County authorities consider the evidence in Cooleys case to be inconclusive and continue to treat her homicide as a cold case . 445 Shelley Kay Robertson 24 failed to show up for work in Golden on July 1 1975. Her nude decomposed body was found by two mining students on August 21 500 feet 150 m inside a mine on Berthoud Pass near Winter Park Resort . 446 Credit card receipts placed Bundy in Golden on the day of Robertsons disappearance but there is no direct evidence of his involvement. 447 Nancy Perry Baird 23 disappeared from the gas station where she worked as a service attendant in Layton Utah 25 miles 40 km north of Salt Lake City on July 4 1975 and remains classified as a missing person. 448 A police officer on patrol saw her working alone there and at 5:30 p.m. less than fifteen minutes later she was discovered missing. 449 Bundy admitted to eight Utah homicides shortly before his execution and authorities suspected that one of the unidentified victims could have been Baird. However her suspected kidnapping did not fit the profile of Bundys past crimes in a number of respects and he explicitly denied involvement during the interviews he gave on death row . 371 Deborah Diane Smith aged 17 was last seen in Salt Lake City in early-February 1976 shortly before the DaRonch trial began; her body was found by a utility worker in an open pasture near Salt Lake City International Airport on April 1 1976. 450 Salt Lake Detective Jim Bell suspected that Bundy may have killed Smith. Were still in limbo on the Debbie Smith one he said. Were going to wait for a time chart. We havent come up with anything on Bundy but we havent ruled anything out either. 451 452 453 Joy Kathleen Harmon 22 was last seen exiting the Better Days Bar in Salt Lake City on the evening of March 2 1976. On March 6 a hiker between Parleys Canyon and Emigration Canyon found her partially clothed body north of Interstate 80 . 454 Harmon had been strangled and beaten; her murder occurred the day after Bundy was found guilty of aggravated kidnapping and three months before he was sentenced to prison and incarcerated on June 30. 455 456 Her case is still unsolved. 457 In media Books Rule Ann 1980. The Stranger Beside Me . W.W. Norton and Company Inc. ISBN 978-1-938402-78-4 Kendall Elizabeth 1981. The Phantom Prince: My Life with Ted Bundy. Abrams Chronicle Books. ISBN 978-1419744853 Michaud Stephen G. and Hugh Aynesworth 2000. Ted Bundy: Conversations with a Killer. Authorlink Press. ISBN 978-1928704-17-1 Sullivan Kevin M 2009. The Bundy Murders: A Comprehensive History. McFarland and Company Inc. ISBN 978-0-786444-26-7 Michaud Stephen G. and Hugh Aynesworth 2012. The Only Living Witness: The True Story of Serial Sex Killer Ted Bundy. Authorlink. ISBN 978-1928704119 Carlisle Al 2017. Violent Mind: The 1976 Psychological Assessment of Ted Bundy. Genius Book Publishing. ISBN 978-0998297-37-8 Nelson Polly 2019. Defending the Devil: My Story as Ted Bundys Last Lawyer. Echo Point Books Media. ISBN 978-1635617-91-7 Kleiner Rubin Kathy and Emilie Le Beau Lucchesi 2023 A Light in the Dark: Surviving More Than Ted Bundy. Chicago Review Press. ISBN 978-1641608-68-8 Film The Deliberate Stranger 1986 played by Mark Harmon Ted Bundy 2002 played by Michael Reilly Burke The Stranger Beside Me 2003 played by Billy Campbell The Riverman 2004 played by Cary Elwes Bundy: An American Icon 2008 played by Corin Nemec The Capture of the Green River Killer 2008 played by James Marsters Extremely Wicked Shockingly Evil and Vile 2019 played by Zac Efron Ted Bundy: American Boogeyman 2021 played by Chad Michael Murray 458 No Man of God 2021 played by Luke Kirby 459 Music The song Ted Just Admit it... by Janes Addiction 460 The song Lotta True Crime by Penelope Scott references Bundy 461 The song Video Crimes by Tin Machine references Bundy 462 The song Ted Bundy by Theory of a Deadman 463 The Philadelphia rock band Officer Roseland is named after the alias Bundy used in his attack on Carol DaRonch Television Ted Bundy: Devil in Disguise 2017 464 Ted Bundy: An American Monster 2017 465 Ted Bundy: What Happened 2017 466 Conversations with a Killer: The Ted Bundy Tapes 2019 467 Ted Bundy: Falling for a Killer 2020 468 See also Biography portal Florida portal United States portal Capital punishment in Florida List of people executed in Florida List of serial killers in the United States Citations Jenkins John Philip September 19 2023. Ted Bundy Biography Crimes Death Facts . Encyclopdia Britannica . Archived from the original on May 4 2022 . Retrieved May 2 2022 . Ottaug Tim August 12 2021. Ted Bundy Killings: A Timeline of His Twisted Reign of Terror . Biography.com . 1982 Bundy appeal brief PDF . law.fsu.edu . Supreme Court of Florida. December 15 1982. p. 11. Archived from the original PDF on June 7 2011 . Retrieved July 14 2010 . Nelson 1994 pp. 323 327. a b c Rule 2009 p. xiv. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 263. Hare Robert D. 1999. Without Conscience: The Disturbing World of the Psychopath Among Us . New York: The Guildford Press. p. 23 . ISBN 978-1-57230-451-2 . a b c d Nelson 1994 p. 319. Lund Family Center Archived March 7 2017 at the Wayback Machine retrieved September 30 2015. Rule 2000 pp. 8 17. a b c Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 62. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 56 330. Barth 2020 p. 291. Barth 2020 pp. 292293. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 56. Tron Gina November 20 2020. What Did A Doctor Learn About Ted Bundy That Made Her Think He Isnt Pure Evil? . Oxygen . Archived from the original on June 7 2023 . Retrieved June 13 2022 . Kendall 1981 pp. 4041. Rule 2000 pp. 1617. Rule 2009 pp. 5152. Rule 2000 p. 505. Michaud Aynesworth 1989 pp. 1718. Rule 2009 p. 9. a b Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 330. a b c Nelson 1994 p. 154. Rule 2000 pp. 501508. Barth 2020 p. 296299. Rule 2000 p. 8. Nelson 1994 p. 155. a b c d e f g Sederstrom Jill August 11 2019. What Was Ted Bundys Childhood Like? . Oxygen . Archived from the original on June 7 2023 . Retrieved August 9 2022 . a b Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 57. a b Rule 2009 p. 51. Michaud Aynesworth 1989 p. 22. Nelson 1994 pp. 277278. Rule 2009 p. 612. Michaud Aynesworth 1989 pp. 7477. Invisible Monsters: Serial Killers in America . Episode 1: First Look. AE. Broadcast 5 August 2021. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 64. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 66. Rule 2009 p. 13. Rule 2009 pp. 1314. Rule 2009 p. 14. Also known as Leslie Holland Foreman 1992 p. 15 Susan Phillips Kendall 1981 p. 99 and Marjorie Russell Michaud Aynesworth 1989 p. 161. McBride Jessica January 28 2019. Diane Edwards Ted Bundys Girlfriend: How She Changed Him . Heavy.com . Archived from the original on May 31 2023 . Retrieved August 27 2022 . a b c d e f g h Ted Bundy Multiagency Investigative Team Report 1992 PDF . U.S. Department of Justice Federal Bureau of Investigation. 1992. Archived from the original on June 21 2006 . Retrieved June 3 2016 . cite web : CS1 maint: unfit URL link Rule 1980 p. 15. Ted Bundys Education . ati.com . June 26 2019. Archived from the original on May 29 2023 . Retrieved March 6 2023 . Larsen 1980 pp. 5 7. Nelson 1994 p. 279. a b Rule 2009 p. 19. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 53. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 74. Storey Kate January 31 2020. Elizabeth Kendall Dated Ted Bundy As He Murdered Dozens. Shes Telling Her Side of the Story . Esquire . Archived from the original on August 10 2023 . Retrieved May 22 2021 . Sederstrom Jill January 13 2020. Naked Hide-And-Seek And Dangerous Lake Shenanigans: Daughter Of Ted Bundys Girlfriend Details Disturbing Incidents In Book . Oxygen . Archived from the original on June 4 2023 . Retrieved February 24 2022 . Rule 2000 pp. 1820. Rule 2000 pp. 2233. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 76. Rule 2009 p. 39. Larsen 1980 pp. 710. Evans man followed Rosy . Ellensburg Daily Record . Ellensburg Washington. United Press International . August 30 1973 . Retrieved April 24 2011 . permanent dead link Crass Scott 2016. Statesmen and Mischief Makers: Volume III: Officeholders and Their Contributions to History from Kennedy to Reagan . Bloomington Indiana: Xlibris . ISBN 978-1514469750 . Archived from the original on May 23 2024 . Retrieved October 15 2020 . Rule 2009 p. 46. Rule 2009 pp. 22 4344. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 79. Rule 2009 pp. 4546. a b Rule 2009 p. 52. a b Foreman 1992 p. 16. Rule 2000 pp. 4447. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 8184. Keppel 2005 p. 400. Nelson 1994 pp. 282284. a b c Campisi Gloria; McGuire Jack January 24 1989. Bundy Admitted Slayings in Area Interviewer Says . Philadelphia Daily News . Philadelphia Pennsylvania: Philadelphia Media Network . Archived from the original on September 10 2013 . Retrieved May 4 2012 . Sullivan 2009 p. 57. a b c Keppel 2005 p. 387. Keppel 2005 p. 396. Rule 2000 p. 526. a b Keppel 2005 pp. 399400. a b Michaud Aynesworth 1989 p. 87. Keppel 2005 p. 389. a b Rule 2009 p. 57. a b Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 27. Michaud Aynesworth 1983 p. 27. a b c Sullivan 2009 p. 14. Rule 2009 pp. 5657. a b Rule 2009 pp. 6062. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 126128. a b Rule 2009 p. 71. 565DFWA Donna Gail Manson . The Doe Network. Archived from the original on February 10 2023 . Retrieved February 10 2023 . Capezi George Jr. August 20 1979. The Bundy Case: There are a lot of strange coincidences concerning the life of Ted Bundy . The Spokesman-Review . Spokane Washington. Archived from the original on December 9 2022 . Retrieved April 17 2012 . a b Keppel 2005 pp. 4246. a b Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 3133. Reward Offered for OSU Coed . Statesman Journal . May 14 1974. Archived from the original on December 9 2022 . Retrieved August 6 2021 . a b Rule 2009 pp. 7576. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 130133. Rule 2009 p. 77. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 137. Rule 2009 pp. 7374. a b Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 37. a b Rule 2009 p. 82. Keppel 2005 pp. 367378. Bundy Did Not Always Carry Out His Murder Plans Prober Told . Deseret News . April 2 1989. Archived from the original on May 8 2020 . Retrieved June 15 2020 . Keppel 2005 p. 22. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 336. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 38. Rule 2000 p. 75. Nordheimer Jon January 25 1989. Bundy Is Put to Death in Florida After Admitting Trail of Killings . The New York Times . New York City. Archived from the original on October 22 2017 . Retrieved September 7 2018 . Michaud Stephen G. The Only Living Witness: The True Story Of Ted Bundy . True TV Crime Library: Criminal Minds and Methods . Turner Broadcasting System . Archived from the original on August 7 2011 . Retrieved April 24 2011 . Kennicott Philip February 19 2010. Ted Bundys VW goes on display at D.C. crime museum but should it? . The Washington Post . Washington DC: Nash Holdings LLC. ISSN 0190-8286 . Archived from the original on November 12 2012 . Retrieved April 24 2011 . Ted Bundys Car at National Museum of Crime and Punishment . CrimeMuseum.org . National Museum of Crime Punishment . 2008. Archived from the original on May 7 2011 . Retrieved April 24 2011 . VW owned by serial killer Ted Bundy . Archived from the original on July 21 2016 . Retrieved July 25 2016 . Rule 2000 p. 81. Rule 2000 p. 76. Rule 2000 p. 77. Michaud Aynesworth 1989 p. vi. Rule 2009 pp. 9091. a b Dental Records Establish Identities of Two Women . The Bulletin . Bend Oregon. Associated Press. September 11 1974. p. 11. Archived from the original on December 9 2022 . Retrieved October 15 2020 . a b c Keppel 2005 pp. 36. a b Rule 2009 pp. 99101. Foreman 1992 p. 45. Michaud Aynesworth 1989 pp. 139142. a b c Geberth 2015 p. 991. Nelson 1994 pp. 294295. Keppel 2005 pp. 6162. Keppel 2005 p. 40. Rule 2000 pp. 103105. a b c Keppel 2005 pp. 815. a b Keppel 2005 p. 18. a b c d e Keppel 2005 pp. 2530. Keppel Michaud 2011 p. 99. Rule 2009 pp. 130131. Nelson 1994 p. 55. Sullivan 2009 p. 86. Nelson 1994 pp. 257259. Rule 2000 p. 527. a b Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 91. Michaud Aynesworth 1989 pp. 143146. Sullivan 2020 p. 221. a b Psychics Join Search . Orlando Sentinel . Orlando Florida: Tronc . April 25 1989. Archived from the original on May 3 2012 . Retrieved May 3 2012 . a b Sullivan 2009 p. 96. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 9293. Rule 1989 p. 112. Utah county still looking for two womens killers . The Deseret News . Salt Lake City Utah. Associated Press . December 16 1977. Archived from the original on May 30 2023 . Retrieved May 4 2012 . a b Bell Rachael. Ted Bundy: Killing Spree . True TV Crime Library: Criminal Minds and Methods . Turner Broadcasting System. Archived from the original on August 7 2011 . Retrieved May 1 2011 . Rule 1989 pp. 11213. Rule 1989 p. 486. a b c Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 334335. Investigation Federal Bureau of 2007. Ted Bundy: The FBI File . Filiquarian Publishing LLC. ISBN 978-1599862552 . Retrieved March 21 2015 . Bundy was convicted of kidnaping Carol DaRonch 19 from Fashion Place Mall earlier that day. permanent dead link a b Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 9395. Bing Maps; Murray to Bountiful . bing.com . Microsoft . Archived from the original on April 25 2011 . Retrieved April 24 2011 . Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 9597. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 101. Sullivan 2020 p. 216. Kendall 1981 pp. 7879. Rule 2009 pp. 14849. Rule 2009 pp. 149150. a b Rule 1989 p. 126. a b Rule 2000 pp. 132136. a b Keppel 2005 pp. 402407. a b Sullivan 2009 pp. 130131. a b Keppel 2010 Kindle location 743198. a b Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 110. a b Sullivan 2009 pp. 137138. a b Levenson Bob January 25 1989. Interview Identifies Victim 12 In Idaho . Orlando Sentinel . Orlando Florida: Tronc . Archived from the original on January 30 2013 . Retrieved May 3 2012 . Pocatello police believe woman was Bundy victim . Moscow-Pullman Daily News . Moscow Iowa. February 9 1989. Archived from the original on May 30 2023 . Retrieved June 10 2013 . a b Kendall 1981 pp. 140141. Rule 2009 pp. 164165. a b Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 343. a b Smith Stephen C. August 19 1979. Mommas boy to murder: Saga of Ted Bundy . Lakeland Ledger . Lakeland Florida. Associated Press. p. 4B. Archived from the original on May 29 2023 . Retrieved April 24 2011 . Morgan said Bundy was raised as a Lutheran but was baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Utah in August 1975. Bennett Roger; Connaughton Ken April 14 1978. Mass murderer or scapegoat?: Bundy evidence cant back theories . Ellensburg Daily Record . Ellensburg Washington. United Press International . p. 18. Archived from the original on May 30 2023 . Retrieved April 24 2011 . Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 158: Bundy joined the Mormon Church that September. Von Drehle 1995 p. 389. Keppel 2005 pp. 6266. Trooper who arrested Ted Bundy dies at 90 . August 9 2017. Archived from the original on January 26 2019 . Retrieved January 26 2019 . Gehrke Robert August 20 2000. Officer recalls Bundys 75 capture . Deseret News . Salt Lake City Utah. Associated Press. Archived from the original on April 21 2012 . Retrieved April 24 2011 . Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 9899 113115. Keppel 2005 p. 71. Sullivan 2009 p. 151. a b Nelson 1994 p. 258. Rule 2000 p. 167. Kendall 1981 p. 74. Rule 2009 pp. 187194. Kendall 1981 pp. 96100. Rule 2009 pp. 226227. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 188. Rule 2000 p. 250. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 189191. Rule 2009 pp. 178179. a b Molteni Megan March 14 2019. DNA Crime-Solving Is Still New Yet It May Have Gone Too Far . Wired . ISSN 1059-1028 . Archived from the original on April 2 2019 . Retrieved March 15 2019 . a b Foreman 1992 p. 24. Kendall 1981 pp. 119120. Rule 2009 pp. 213215. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 163165. Judge says Bundy is guilty of kidnaping . Deseret News . Salt Lake City Utah. March 1 1976. p. A1. Archived from the original on May 30 2023 . Retrieved October 15 2020 . Rule 2009 p. 205. Rule 2009 pp. 265267. Rule 1989 p. 219. Foreman 1992 p. 25. Winn Merrill 1980 . Rule 2009 p. 285. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 197. Rule 2009 pp. 286291. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 203205. Rule 2009 pp. 290293. Larsen 1980 p. 2. Winn Merrill 1980 pp. 204208. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 206. Rule 2009 p. 306. Nation: The Case of the Chi Omega Killer . Time . New York City: Time Inc. July 16 1979. Archived from the original on July 10 2011 . Retrieved July 5 2011 . Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 209. Rule 2009 pp. 302303. Rule 2009 pp. 304305. Rule 2009 p. 305. Rule 2009 p. 308. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 209211. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 212213. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 215216. Wilson Colin 1989. Clues! A History of Forensic Detection . Warner Books. Rule 2009 p. 7. Foreman 1992 p. 31. Rule 2009 p. 318. a b Rule 2009 p. 332. Foreman 1992 p. 34. Rule 1989 pp. 278279. Miller Gene; Buchanan James July 10 1979. A Cool Bundy Friends of Two Murdered Sorority Sisters Testify As Pace of Trial Picks Up . Evening Independent . St. Petersburg Florida . Retrieved July 6 2011 . permanent dead link Telfer Tori January 29 2019. Ted Bundys Living Victim Tells Her Story . Rolling Stone . New York City: Jann Wenner . Archived from the original on January 29 2019 . Retrieved January 29 2019 . Wilson Amy January 15 1989. Bundy the memories will not die . South Florida Sun Sentinel . Archived from the original on October 16 2021 . Retrieved July 25 2021 . Minutaglio Rose February 14 2019. Ted Bundy Survivor Cheryl Thomas Describes Terrifying Encounter in New Documentary . Elle . Archived from the original on May 23 2024 . Retrieved May 4 2024 . Rule 1989 p. 277. Rule 2009 p. 339340. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 243244. a b The History of the Florida Highway Patrol 19721982 . flhsmv.gov . Florida Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles. Archived from the original on October 3 2011 . Retrieved April 30 2011 . Rule 1989 pp. 324325. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 262 304305. Dekle 2011 p. 75 195. Winn Merrill 1980 pp. 245246. Pensacola Police Make a Mark in History . pensacolapolice.com . Pensacola Police Department. Archived from the original on April 26 2012 . Retrieved April 24 2011 . Rule 2009 p. 366. Rule 2009 p. 367. Rule 2009 p. 398. Rule 2000 pp. 321323. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 274. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 10. Nelson 1994 pp. 87 91. Dekle 2011 p. 124. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 271272 attorney Millard Farmer devised this strategy as a means of selling Bundy on the plea deal according to this account. Dekle 2011 p. 125. a b Word Ron January 24 1999. Survivors Are Haunted By Memory of Ted Bundy 10 Years After Execution . The Seattle Times . Seattle Washington. Associated Press . Archived from the original on April 28 2013 . Retrieved April 25 2011 . Dekle 2011 pp. 154155. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 227 283. McMahon Patrick July 18 1979. Nita Neary tells jury Bundy is man she saw leaving Chi Omega . St. Petersburg Times . St. Petersburg Florida . Retrieved July 6 2011 . permanent dead link Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 230 283285. Dekle 2011 p. 156. Bundy v. State of Florida PDF . Florida State University College of Law . May 9 1985. Archived from the original PDF on September 16 2012 . Retrieved May 23 2022 . Bundy v. Wainwright 808 F.2d 1410 Fla. 1987 Archived April 7 2012 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved July 21 2011. Bell Rachael. Ted Bundy: The Kimberly Leach Trial . True TV Crime Library: Criminal Minds and Methods . Turner Broadcasting System. Archived from the original on August 7 2011 . Retrieved May 1 2011 . Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 303. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 306107. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 308310. Bundys wife is pregnant but she refuses to kiss tell . Deseret News . Salt Lake City Utah. Associated Press . September 30 1981. Archived from the original on April 25 2023 . Retrieved April 25 2011 . Hagood Dick February 10 1980. Bundy Jury: Death Florida Times Union archive Archived June 28 2010 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved August 30 2011. Foreman 1992 p. 42. Nelson 1994 p. 7. Levenson Bob January 24 1989. Courtroom Wife Fades Out of Sight Not A Recent Visitor . Orlando Sentinel . Archived from the original on March 7 2019 . Retrieved January 25 2019 . a b Rule 2009 p. xxxiv. Nelson 1994 p. 56. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 272; Bundy Boone and a prison guard all told this source that the couple took advantage on at least one visit together to consummate their relationship . Michaud Aynesworth 1989 pp. 1517. Michaud Aynesworth 1989 pp. 3739. Michaud Aynesworth 1989 p. 41. Michaud Aynesworth 1989 pp. 102114. Michaud Aynesworth 1989 pp. 124126. Rule 2009 pp. 380396. Rule 2009 p. 528. The Trials of Ted Bundy . Deseret News . Salt Lake City Utah. January 24 1989. Archived from the original on September 11 2013 . Retrieved April 28 2011 . a b Rule 2009 p. 532. Nelson 1994 pp. 155156. Keppel 2005 p. 176. Nelson 1994 pp. 33 101 135. Keppel 2005 p. 26; Bundy coined the nickname The Riverman which was later used for the title of Keppels book The Riverman: Ted Bundy and I Hunt for the Green River Killer .. Keppel Michaud 2011 Kindle location 1690. Whitely Peyton August 7 1995. Ted Bundy Helped Green River Investigation Detective Says Bundy Met With King County Officials Probing Killings . The Spokesman-Review . Spokane Washington. Archived from the original on May 8 2018 . Retrieved May 8 2018 . Mello 1997 pp. 103104. a b Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 339. Keppel 2005 pp. 378 393. Nelson 1994 p. 111. a b Bundy v. Wainwright 794 F.2d US Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit July 2 1986 The judgment of the district court is REVERSED and the case REMANDED to that court for proper consideration. archived from the original. Bundy v. Florida . Justia . Archived from the original on July 23 2023 . Retrieved August 9 2022 . Mello 1997 pp. 103106. Von Drehle 1995 p. 297. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 337. a b Rule 2000 p. 516. Keppel 2005 p. 395. Rule 2000 p. 519. Speculation controversy still surround Bundy . Deseret News . January 29 1989. Archived from the original on October 2 2024 . Retrieved October 2 2024 . Keppel 2010 Kindle location 760005. Von Drehle 1995 pp. 352358. Keppel 2005 p. 363. Keppel 2010 Kindle location 755058. Nelson 1994 pp. 136137 255 302304. Nelson 1994 p. 264. Rule 2000 p. 518. Nelson 1994 p. 256. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 335336. Nelson 1994 pp. 271 303. https:www.gq.com.mxentretenimientoarticuloted-bundy-quien-es-historia-real-y-perfil-psicologico-del-asesino-en-serie These Were The Last Words Ted Bundy Ever Spoke . Grunge.com . August 23 2021. Archived from the original on June 28 2023 . Retrieved January 14 2022 . Roy Roger; Dezern Craig January 25 1989. Bundy Finally Draws Cheers: Hundreds Celebrate Execution . Orlando Sentinel . Orlando Florida: Tronc . Archived from the original on July 20 2011 . Retrieved July 19 2011 . Parker Laura January 25 1989. 2 000 Cheer Execution of Killer Bundy; Thank God Its Finally Over . The Washington Post . Washington DC: Nash Holdings LLC. Archived from the original on April 28 2013 . Retrieved January 19 2013 . Nelson 1994 pp. 311321. Nelson 1994 p. 323. Bundys Will Requests Cremation and Scattering of Ashes in Washington . Deseret News . Salt Lake City Utah. Associated Press. January 26 1989. Archived from the original on January 5 2013 . Retrieved January 3 2012 . Rule 2009 pp. xxxvixxxvii. a b Von Drehle 1995 pp. 283285. Von Drehle 1995 p. 285. Keppel 2005 p. 30. Michaud Aynesworth 1989 p. 111. a b c Nelson 1994 p. 257. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 16. Keppel 2005 p. 80. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 159. Michaud Aynesworth 1989 p. vii. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 176. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 73. Rule 2009 p. 241. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 172. Rule 2009 pp. 1416. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 12. Chua-Eoan Howard 2007. Top 25 Crimes of the Century . Time . New York City: Meredith Corporation . ISSN 0040-781X . Archived from the original on January 19 2011 . Retrieved May 6 2012 . Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 14. Sullivan 2009 pp. 101102 211. a b Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 1213. Michaud Aynesworth 1989 pp. 8384. a b Michaud Aynesworth 1989 p. 196. Keppel 2010 Kindle location 7481. Rule 2009 p. 279. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 334. Keppel 2010 Kindle location 758391 7655. Enns Gregory May 21 1989. Bundys mystique lives on . Anchorage Daily News . Anchorage Alaska. Archived from the original on January 24 2013 . Retrieved May 6 2012 . Keppel 2005 p. 379. Keppel 2010 Kindle location 7046. Michaud Aynesworth 1989 pp. 7677. Kendall 1981 p. 182. Rule 2000 pp. 431432. Michaud Aynesworth 1989 p. 156. Michaud Aynesworth 1989 p. 85. Rule 2009 pp. 612613. Nelson 1994 p. 152. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 331. Nelson 1994 pp. 231232. Mack Raneta Lawson 1999. A Laypersons Guide to Criminal Law . Westport Connecticut: Greenwood Publishing . p. 136. ISBN 978-0-313-30556-6 . Archived from the original on May 23 2024 . Retrieved October 15 2020 . Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 13. a b Long Phillip W. Antisocial Personality Disorder: World Health Organization ICD-10 . www.mentalhealth.com . World Health Organization . Archived from the original on September 11 2013 . Retrieved April 30 2011 . Lilienfeld Scott O.; Arkowitz Hal November 28 2007. What Psychopath Means: It is not quite what you may think . Scientific American . New York City: Nature Publishing Group. doi : 10.1038scientificamericanmind1207-80 . ISSN 0036-8733 . Archived from the original on March 19 2011 . Retrieved April 30 2011 . Ted knew the difference between right and wrong but it didnt matter because he was special and he deserved to have and do what he wanted. He was the center of the world; we were all paper-doll figures who didnt matter. Rule 2009 pp. 611612 Michaud Aynesworth 1989 p. 281. The Psychopath Next Door . Doc Zone . Season 201415. Episode 7. November 27 2014. 3 minutes in. CBC Television . Canadian Broadcasting Corporation . Archived from the original on May 2 2023 . Retrieved May 2 2023 . Dekle 2011 p. 131. Von Drehle 1995 p. 288. Nelson 1994 p. 316. Samuel Douglas B.; Widiger Thomas A. 2007. Describing Ted Bundys Personality and Working towards DSM-V . Independent Practitioner . 27 1. Lexington Kentucky: Department of Psychology at the University of Kentucky: 2022. Griffith Kaitlyn. You Might Think This Article Is About You: A Neurological Overview of Narcissistic Personality Disorder . Archived from the original on December 3 2023 . Retrieved April 1 2024 . Bundy Ted January 24 1989. Fatal Addiction: Ted Bundys Final Interview Interview. Interviewed by James Dobson . Railford Florida: Focus on the Family . Shapiro Ben 2005. Porn Generation: How Social Liberalism Is Corrupting Our Future . Washington DC: Regnery Publishing . p. 160. ISBN 0-89526-016-6 . a b Meyers Art November 17 2010. The Ted Bundy Murders . WCTV . Thomasville Georgia: Gray Television. Archived from the original on October 12 2018 . Retrieved October 11 2018 . Michaud Aynesworth 1989 p. 320. a b Rule 2009 p. 611. Keppel 2005 pp. 401402. Hyatt P. October 3 2012. Ted Bundys Final Interview . Statement Analysis . Blogspot.com . Archived from the original on September 7 2013 . Retrieved June 18 2013 . Goldstein Al February 8 1989. The Perversion of Truth Continues in Alleging a Porn-Crime Link . Los Angeles Times . Los Angeles California. Archived from the original on June 18 2013 . Retrieved June 18 2013 . Nelson 1994 p. 318. Rule 2009 pp. 611412. a b c Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 340. Dekle 2011 p. 219. Rule 2009 pp. 603604. Michaud Aynesworth 1989 pp. 216222 250. Rule 2009 p. 404. Kendall 1981 p. 167. Von Drehle 1995 pp. 288289. Michaud Aynesworth 1989 p. xi. Nelson 1994 p. 280. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 199. Rule 2000 p. 335. Ted Bundy Lynnette Culver 1989 Hardcopy . YouTube . June 28 2020. Archived from the original on May 23 2024 . Retrieved August 9 2022 . Thrasher John July 16 2018. Ted Bundy Admitted To His Lawyer That He Killed A Young Boy In The Woods . Oxygen . Archived from the original on August 13 2022 . Retrieved August 9 2022 . Douglas C.R. May 23 2012. Ted Bundys lawyer: Bundy killed more than 100 women and a man . Orlando Sentinel . p. Q3. Archived from the original on November 10 2013 . Retrieved November 11 2013 . Sederstrom Jill August 19 2019. Who Was The Victim That Ted Bundy Admitted Taking Back To His Home? . Oxygen . Archived from the original on August 15 2022 . Retrieved August 9 2022 . Von Drehle 1995 p. 363. Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 28. 917UFWA . Doe Network. Archived from the original on February 10 2023 . Retrieved February 10 2023 . UP5706 . NamUs. Archived from the original on June 9 2019 . Retrieved February 10 2023 . Shearer Dan June 11 2014. Georgann Hawkins died at the hands of Ted Bundy but thats not how her mom wants her remembered . Green Valley News . Archived from the original on May 4 2016 . Retrieved March 1 2016 . Schulte Scott November 20 2006. When evil walked our streets . Davis County Clipper . Woods Cross Utah: Davis County Clipper Inc. Archived from the original on April 15 2012 . Retrieved May 6 2012 . Jackson Steve 2002. No Stone Unturned: The Story of NecroSearch International . New York: Kensington Books . pp. 7590 . ISBN 978-1-57566-456-9 . Keppel 2010 Kindle location 9046. Colorado Bureau of Investigation Cold Case Files: Denise Oliverson . CBI . Archived from the original on September 17 2013 . Retrieved December 22 2011 . Keppel 2010 Kindle location 9040. a b c d e Rule 2009 pp. 334343. a b Keppel 2010 Kindle location 7375. a b Michaud Aynesworth 1999 pp. 343344. Goode Erica August 9 2011. DNA Profile of Ted Bundy Gives Hope to Old Cases . The New York Times . New York City. Archived from the original on March 3 2019 . Retrieved March 4 2019 . NamUS Missing Persons Database: Ann Marie Burr . National Missing and Unidentified Persons System . Archived from the original on May 27 2013 . Retrieved April 27 2012 . Levenson Bob January 24 1989. Parents are Left to Wonder . Orlando Sentinel . Archived from the original on February 4 2020 . Retrieved May 14 2022 . Morris 2013 p. page needed . a b Morris 2013 pp. 238240. Rule 2009 p. 623. David Lohr October 5 2011. DNA Evidence Fails To Link Ted Bundy To Ann Marie Burr . The Huffington Post . New York City: Huffington Post Media Group . Archived from the original on December 16 2011 . Retrieved December 29 2012 . Coast Stewardess Fatally Beaten . Spokane Daily Chronicle . Spokane Washington. June 22 1966. Archived from the original on December 14 2022 . Retrieved May 3 2012 . Keppel 2010 Kindle location 7135. Rule 2009 p. 509. Keppel 2005 p. 386. Coeds Found Dead Victims of Murder . The Free Lance-Star . Fredericksburg Virginia. Associated Press . June 3 1969. Archived from the original on December 14 2022 . Retrieved May 4 2012 . a b Lewis Larry May 31 1993. 69 Killings Near Parkway Unsolved But Bundy Is Blamed ... The Philadelphia Inquirer . Philadelphia Pennsylvania: Philadelphia Media Network . Archived from the original on January 31 2013 . Retrieved May 4 2012 . Rule 1989 pp. 416417. Rule 2009 pp. 505508. Keller Larry January 24 1989. STARKE Confessed mass murderer Ted Bundy... Archived February 23 2020 at the Wayback Machine Sun-Sentinel.com . Retrieved July 12 2020. Rule 2009 p. 508. Unsolved Homicide Rita Curran . Vermont State Police. Archived from the original on July 24 2016 . Retrieved June 1 2016 . Cigarette Butt Leads to Teachers Killer over 50 Years Later . February 21 2023. Archived from the original on February 22 2023 . Retrieved February 22 2023 . Johnson David February 9 2009. Swept under the rug: WSU students remains found nine months after carpet reported missing from dorm. MediaSpokesman.com archive Archived June 6 2012 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved December 28 2012. a b A list of women Bundy has confessed to killing . Associated Press . January 25 1989. Archived from the original on July 9 2014 . Retrieved December 29 2012 . Investigators seek information on murdered woman last seen on Capitol Hill in 1972 . June 4 2011. Northwest News: Gladstone woman arrested in beauticians homicide; remains discovered in Eastern Washington are those of woman who disappeared 40 years ago . June 4 2011. Archived from the original on October 28 2022 . Retrieved February 10 2023 . Human remains IDd as Seattle woman who vanished in 72 Seattle News Weather Sports Breaking News KOMO News Local Regional . Archived from the original on August 5 2011. Kittitas County Press Releases . Archived from the original on June 12 2011. The Unconfirmed Cases: Kerry Hardy-May; 1972 . May 12 2022. Expert: Too Soon to Tell if Skeletal Remains Were Those of Ted Bundy Victim . Huffpost UK . June 6 2011. Archived from the original on October 28 2022 . Retrieved February 10 2023 . a b NamUS Missing Persons Database: Vicki Lynn Hollar . National Missing and Unidentified Persons System. Archived from the original on May 27 2013 . Retrieved April 27 2012 . a b Bundy link considered in 4 local cases . Eugene Register-Guard . Suzanne Rae Justis . NamUs . Archived from the original on May 21 2018 . Retrieved August 23 2023 . Suzanne Rae Justis . The Charley Project . Archived from the original on August 23 2023 . Retrieved August 23 2023 . NamUS Missing Persons Database: Rita Lorraine Jolly . National Missing and Unidentified Persons System. Archived from the original on May 27 2013 . Retrieved April 27 2012 . Michaud Aynesworth 1999 p. 338. a b c Man sentenced to life in prison for 1973 murder . The Seattle Times . Seattle Washington. Associated Press. July 30 2002. Archived from the original on April 28 2013 . Retrieved April 30 2011 . Ith Ian March 9 2002. Prisoner charged in teen girls 73 slaying . The Seattle Times . Seattle Washington. Archived from the original on April 28 2013 . Retrieved April 11 2014 . Keppel 2005 pp. 257262. Keppel 2010 Kindle location 7118. Utah tie-in to Colorado slaying? . The Deseret News . Salt Lake City Utah. January 20 1975. Archived from the original on December 14 2022 . Retrieved December 1 2012 . Link to state woman unclear . The Milwaukee Journal . Milwaukee Wisconsin. Associated Press . January 25 1989 . Retrieved December 1 2012 . permanent dead link Utah law officers follow up on serial killers confessions . The Spokesman-Review . Spokane Washington. Associated Press . January 24 1989. Archived from the original on May 30 2023 . Retrieved December 1 2012 . Ted Bundy Attack Survivor Explains Why She Kept Silent and Why Shes Talking Now . People . Archived from the original on August 29 2023 . Retrieved August 29 2023 . Ted Bundy: The Survivors: Rhonda Stapley believes her silence resulted in assault and killing of more victims . meaww.com . October 4 2020. Archived from the original on August 29 2023 . Retrieved August 29 2023 . Ted Bundy Victim Recalls Her Encounter With The Serial Killer . YouTube . April 26 2016. Archived from the original on August 29 2023 . Retrieved August 29 2023 . Suspected Ted Bundy Victim Recounts Her Harrowing Escape . Oxygen . October 6 2020. Archived from the original on August 29 2023 . Retrieved August 29 2023 . Colorado Bureau of Investigation Cold Case Files: Melanie Suzanne Cooley . CBI . Archived from the original on September 17 2013 . Retrieved December 27 2011 . Holmes Ronald M.; Holmes Stephen T. 1989. Profiling Violent Crimes: An Investigative Tool . Thousand Oaks California: SAGE Publications . p. 76 . ISBN 978-0-8039-3681-2 . Cold Cases . Jefferson County Colorado Sheriffs Office. Archived from the original on May 10 2012 . Retrieved May 6 2012 . Colorado Bureau of Investigation Cold Case Files: Shelly Robertson . CBI . Archived from the original on September 17 2013 . Retrieved May 2 2012 . Rule 2009 pp. 162163. Utah Department of Public Safety: Utahs Missing Persons . UDPS . Archived from the original on February 2 2012 . Retrieved January 24 2012 . NamUS Missing Persons Database: Nancy Perry Baird . National Missing and Unidentified Persons System. Archived from the original on May 27 2013 . Retrieved May 2 2012 . Keller Larry January 24 1989. Confessed mass murderer Bundy showed remorse . Sun-Sentinel . Deerfield Beach Florida: Tronc . Archived from the original on September 23 2012 . Retrieved December 20 2011 . Bundy Meet Does Little to Solve Cases . Deseret News . February 28 1989. Archived from the original on September 8 2023 . Retrieved September 8 2023 . Rule 2009 p. 599. Deborah Diane SMITH . Utah Department of Public Safety . Archived from the original on July 1 2023 . Retrieved July 1 2023 . Investigators reopen 1970s murder case . KSL . Archived from the original on July 18 2023 . Retrieved July 18 2023 . Did Bundy Kill Others in Utah Besides 8? . Deseret News . Archived from the original on July 18 2023 . Retrieved July 18 2023 . Police analyzing DNA from 2 men in 1976 death . Deseret News . Archived from the original on July 18 2023 . Retrieved July 18 2023 . Joy Kathleen Harmon . Utah Department of Public Safety . Archived from the original on July 18 2023 . Retrieved July 18 2023 . Kay2021-04-27T06:43:0001:00 Jeremy. Voltage Pictures takes world rights on Ted Bundy thriller American Boogeyman exclusive . Screen . Archived from the original on May 3 2021 . Retrieved May 28 2021 . cite web : CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list link Gleiberman Owen June 12 2021. No Man of God Review: Ted Bundy Is Played with Eerie Authenticity but What Is There Left to Learn About Serial Killers? . Variety . Archived from the original on April 25 2023 . Retrieved June 14 2021 . Ted Just Admit It... SongFacts . Songfacts LLC. Archived from the original on June 26 2019 . Retrieved January 30 2021 . Penelope Scott Lotta True Crime archived from the original on July 12 2023 retrieved November 4 2021 Perone James E. 2007. The Words and Music of David Bowie . p. 102. Theory Ted Bundy Official Audio . YouTube. January 31 2020. Archived from the original on April 25 2023 . Retrieved July 30 2022 . Ted Bundy: Devil In Disguise . TV Guide . CBS Interactive Inc. 2017. Archived from the original on July 3 2018 . Retrieved July 3 2018 . Ted Bundy: An American Monster . TV Guide . New York City: CBS Interactive Inc. 2017. Archived from the original on July 3 2018 . Retrieved July 3 2018 . Ted Bundy: What Happened . TV Guide . New York City: CBS Interactive Inc. 2017. Archived from the original on July 3 2018 . Retrieved July 3 2018 . Ted Bundy Survivor Recalls Her Horrifying Experience In Netflix Clip . UPROXX . January 24 2019 . Retrieved January 24 2019 . Prime Video: Ted Bundy: Falling for a Killer - Season 1 . www.primevideo.com . Retrieved November 26 2020 . General and cited sources Barth Christian 2020. The Garden State Parkway Murders . Denver: WildBlue Press. ISBN 978-1-948239-76-9 . Dekle George R. Sr. 2011. The Last Murder: The Investigation Prosecution and Execution of Ted Bundy Hardcover ed.. Santa Barbara California: Praeger Imprint of ABC-CLIO . ISBN 978-0-313-39743-1 . Foreman Laura 1992. Serial Killers True Crime Hardcover ed.. Alexandria Virginia: Time-Life Books. ISBN 978-0-7835-0001-0 . Geberth Vernon 2015. Practical Homicide Investigation Tactics Procedures and Forensic Techniques 5th ed.. Boca Raton Florida: CRC Press . ISBN 978-1-4822-3507-4 . Kendall Elizabeth September 1981. The Phantom Prince: My Life With Ted Bundy Hardcover 1st ed.. Seattle Washington: Madrona. ISBN 978-0-914842-70-5 . Elizabeth Kloepfer writing under a pseudonym Keppel Robert 2005. The Riverman: Ted Bundy and I Hunt for the Green River Killer Paperback ed.. New York City: Pocket Books. ISBN 978-0-7434-6395-9 . Updated after the arrest and confession of the Green River killer Gary Ridgway . Keppel Robert 2010. The Riverman: Ted Bundy and I Hunt for the Green River Killer Kindle ed.. New York City: Simon Schuster . ISBN 978-1-4391-9434-8 . Keppel Robert D.; Michaud Stephen G. 2011. Terrible Secrets: Ted Bundy on Serial Murder Enhanced E-Book ed.. Irving Texas: Authorlink Press. ISBN 978-1-928704-97-3 . Larsen Richard W. 1980. Bundy: The Deliberate Stranger Hardcover ed.. Englewood Cliffs New Jersey: Prentice Hall. ISBN 978-0-13-089185-3 . Mello Michael A. 1997. Dead Wrong: A Death Row Lawyer Speaks Out Against Capital Punishment Paperback ed.. Madison Wisconsin: The University of Wisconsin Press . ISBN 0-299-15344-4 . Michaud Stephen; Aynesworth Hugh 1983. The Only Living Witness: The True Story of Serial Sex Killer Ted Bundy . New York City: Linden Press Simon Schuster . ISBN 978-0-671449-61-2 . Michaud Stephen; Aynesworth Hugh August 1999 1983. The Only Living Witness: The True Story of Serial Sex Killer Ted Bundy Paperback; revised ed.. Irving Texas: Authorlink Press. ISBN 978-1-928704-11-9 . Archived from the original on May 23 2024 . Retrieved October 15 2020 . Michaud Stephen; Aynesworth Hugh October 1989. Ted Bundy: Conversations with a Killer Paperback ed.. New York City: Signet Books . ISBN 978-0-451-16355-4 . Transcripts of the authors Death Row interviews with Bundy Morris Rebecca 2013. Ted and Ann: The Mystery of a Missing Child and Her Neighbor Ted Bundy 2nd ed.. New York City: CreateSpace. ISBN 978-1484925089 . Nelson Polly 1994. Defending the Devil: My Story as Ted Bundys Last Lawyer . New York City: William Morrow . ISBN 978-0-688-10823-6 . Rule Ann 1980. The Stranger Beside Me First ed.. New York and London: W. W. Norton Company. ISBN 0-393-01399-5 . Rule Ann 1989. The Stranger Beside Me Paperback; revised and updated ed.. New York City: Signet Books . ISBN 978-0-451-16493-3 . Rule Ann 2000. The Stranger Beside Me Paperback; updated 20th anniversary ed.. New York: Signet Books . ISBN 978-0-451-20326-7 . Rule Ann 2009. The Stranger Beside Me Paperback; updated 2009 ed.. New York City: Pocket Books. ISBN 978-1-4165-5959-7 . Sullivan Kevin M. 2009. The Bundy Murders: A Comprehensive History Paperback ed.. Jefferson North Carolina: McFarland and Co. ISBN 978-0-7864-4426-7 . Sullivan Kevin 2019. Ted Bundys Murderous Mysteries: The Many Victims Of Americas Most Infamous Serial Killer paperback ed.. Denver Colorado: WildBlue Press. ISBN 978-1948239158 . Archived from the original on May 23 2024 . Retrieved October 15 2020 . Sullivan Kevin 2020. The Enigma of Ted Bundy: The Questions and Controversies Surrounding Americas Most Infamous Serial Killer ebook ed.. Denver Colorado: WildBlue Press. ISBN 978-1-952225-37-6 . Archived from the original on March 27 2024 . Retrieved March 2 2024 . Von Drehle David 1995. Among the lowest of the dead: inside death row . New York: Fawcett Crest. ISBN 978-0-449-22523-3 . Winn Steven; Merrill David 1980. Ted Bundy: The Killer Next Door Paperback ed.. New York City: Bantam Books . ISBN 978-0-553-13637-1 . External links Ted Bundy at Wikipedias sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Ted Bundy at IMDb FBI file on Ted Bundy at vault.fbi.gov Wanted by FBI Theodore Robert Bundy FBI Audiotapes of Bundys 1989 confessions Kimberly Leach appeals briefs and court ruling ; Chi Omega appeals briefs and court ruling ; 1986 ruling by the United States Supreme Court in Leach case; 1989 Leach appeal brief and court ruling by the Florida Supreme Court v t e Ted Bundy Associated people Hugh Aynesworth George R. Dekle Sr. Robert D. Keppel Polly Nelson Ann Rule Cultural depictions Books The Deliberate Stranger Defending the Devil The Stranger Beside Me Films Bundy: An American Icon Extremely Wicked Shockingly Evil and Vile No Man of God The Poughkeepsie Tapes The Riverman Ted Bundy Ted Bundy: American Boogeyman Television The Capture of the Green River Killer Conversations with a Killer: The Ted Bundy Tapes Ted Bundy: Falling for a Killer Hell on Earth 2006 Music Sinister Slaughter Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Poland Israel Catalonia Other IdRef Retrieved from https:en.wikipedia.orgwindex.php?titleTedBundyoldid1249992351 Categories : Ted Bundy 1946 births 1989 deaths 1974 murders in the United States 1975 murders in the United States 1978 murders in the United States 20th-century executions by Florida 20th-century executions of American people American escapees American male criminals American murderers of children American people convicted of kidnapping American rapists Converts from Mormonism Converts to Methodism Converts to Mormonism from Methodism Criminals from Tacoma Washington Escapees from Colorado detention Child sexual abuse in the United States Executed American serial killers Executed people from Vermont FBI Ten Most Wanted Fugitives Fugitives Human trophy collecting Latter Day Saints from California Latter Day Saints from Colorado Latter Day Saints from Florida Latter Day Saints from Idaho Latter Day Saints from Oregon Latter Day Saints from Utah Latter Day Saints from Washington state Methodists from Washington state Necrophiles People convicted of murder by Florida People excommunicated by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints People executed by Florida by electric chair People from Burlington Vermont People from Salt Lake City People with antisocial personality disorder Serial killers from California Serial killers from Colorado Serial killers from Florida Serial killers from Idaho Serial killers from Oregon Serial killers from Philadelphia Serial killers from Utah Serial killers from Washington state Temple University alumni University of Puget Sound alumni University of Utah alumni University of Washington College of Arts and Sciences alumni Violence against women in the United States Washington state Republicans Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: unfit URL All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2019 CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Good articles Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use mdy dates from January 2023 Articles with hCards Pages using infobox criminal with motive parameter Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 7 October 2024 at 22:25 UTC . Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ; additional terms may apply. By using this site you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation Inc. a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view