Onika Tanya Maraj-Petty (née Maraj; born December 8, 1982), known professionally as Nicki Minaj ( NIK-ee min-AHZH), is a Trinidadian rapper, singer, and songwriter based in the United States. Regarded as the "Queen of Rap" and one of the most influential rappers of all time, she is credited as a significant force in helping propel the mainstream resurgence of female rap in the early 2010s. Known for her dynamic rap flow, witty lyrics, musical versatility, and alter egos, Minaj first gained recognition after releasing three mixtapes between 2007 and 2009.
Her debut studio album, Pink Friday (2010), topped the US Billboard 200 and produced the largest female rap album sales week of the 21st century; it spawned the RIAA diamond-certified top-five single "Super Bass". Minaj explored dance-pop on her second US number-one album, Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded (2012), yielding the internationally successful single "Starships". She returned to her hip hop roots with her third and fourth albums, The Pinkprint (2014) and Queen (2018), with hit singles "Anaconda" and "Chun-Li". Minaj achieved her first two Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles in 2020 as a featured artist on Doja Cat's "Say So" and 6ix9ine's "Trollz"; the former was the first female rap collaboration to top the chart. Two years later, she garnered her first solo US number-one song with "Super Freaky Girl", the lead single from her fifth studio album, Pink Friday 2 (2023), which debuted at number one in the US and broke several female rap sales and streaming records. The accompanying concert tour became the highest-grossing tour for a female rapper. 
Minaj is one of the world's best-selling music artists, and the best-selling female rapper, with over 100 million records sold. Billboard ranked her as the greatest female rapper of all time, the top female rapper of the 2010s, and among the greatest pop stars of the 21st century. Having sold over 100 million certified units in the US (albums and songs), she is among the RIAA's 50 highest-certified digital singles artists. Her various accolades include a Brit Award, five Billboard Music Awards, nine American Music Awards, eight MTV Video Music Awards (including the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award), 12 BET Awards, a Soul Train Music Award, and three Guinness World Records. In 2012, Forbes included Minaj in its 30 Under 30 listicle, and in 2016, Time named her one of the 100 most influential people in the world. Her outspoken views, personal life, and fanbase have received significant media attention.
Minaj founded the Heavy On It Records label imprint in 2023. Outside of music, her other endeavors include a fragrance line, a press on nails line, a Loci sneakers collection, the radio show Queen Radio (2018–2023), and as an actress, she played roles in the animated films Ice Age: Continental Drift (2012) and The Angry Birds Movie 2 (2019), and the comedy films The Other Woman (2014) and Barbershop: The Next Cut (2016). On television, she served as a judge on the twelfth season of American Idol (2013).

Early life
Onika Tanya Maraj was born on December 8, 1982, in the Saint James district of Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago. Her father was Robert Maraj (1956–2021), a financial executive and part-time gospel singer of Dougla (Afro-Trinidadian mother and Indo-Trinidadian father) descent. Her mother, Carol, is also a gospel singer with Afro-Trinidadian ancestry. Carol worked in payroll and accounting departments during Minaj's youth. Minaj's father was an alcoholic and crack cocaine addict whom Minaj described to be "violent" and abusive to her mother. He committed arson onto their house in December 1987. She has an older brother named Jelani, a younger brother named Micaiah, and a younger sister named Ming.
As a child, Minaj and Jelani grew up with their grandmother in Saint James in a household with 11 cousins. Carol was working numerous jobs in Saint James before getting her green card at the age of 24. She then moved to the Bronx in New York to attend Monroe College, leaving both Minaj and Jelani in Trinidad with their grandmother. Eventually, when Minaj was five, Carol got her first house, on 147th Street in South Jamaica, Queens and brought both Minaj and Jelani to live with her and their father. Minaj said she came to the United States as an illegal immigrant, although by the time she moved to the United States her mother and subsequently her father had lawful permanent residency. She revealed in 2024 that she is not a US citizen: "you would think that with the millions of dollars that I've paid in taxes to this country that I would have been given an honorary citizenship many, many [years] ago." Minaj recalled, "I don't think I had a lot of discipline in my household. My mom motivated me, but it wasn't a strict household. I kind of wanted a strict household."  Minaj successfully auditioned for admission to Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts, which focuses on visual and performing arts. After graduation, Minaj wanted to become an actress, and she was cast in the Off-Broadway play In Case You Forget in 2001.
At the age of 19, as she struggled with her acting career, she worked as a waitress at a Red Lobster in the Bronx, but was fired for discourtesy to customers. She said she was fired from "at least 15 jobs" for similar reasons. Other jobs included customer service representative and office management on Wall Street. Minaj recalls buying a BMW as a 19-year-old with the money from waitressing.

Career
2004–2009: Career beginnings and mixtapes
In the early 2000s, Minaj rapped in a New York hip hop group called Hoodstars, composed of rappers Lou$tar and 7even Up and hype man Safaree Samuels. The son of Bowlegged Lou from Full Force, Lou$tar recruited Minaj when he and his father heard her work. Bowlegged Lou liked Minaj's rapping, and said that back then she was already doing "the crazy voices" in her vocal performances. In 2004, the group recorded the entrance song for WWE Diva Victoria, "Don't Mess With", which was featured on the compilation album ThemeAddict: WWE The Music, Vol.6. Full Force tried to get Hoodstars a record deal but were unsuccessful. They then worked with Minaj as a solo artist, meeting with some record companies, including Warner Brothers, who expressed interest in signing Minaj out of the group but required a ghostwriter for a deal. Minaj refused, adamant that she will always write her songs. Brian George from Full Force said that Minaj was impressive in her ambition, describing her as "broke and hungry" while determined to be in control of her craft. 
Minaj continued to work independently and uploaded her songs on her Myspace profile, sending several of them to people in the music industry. Later, Fendi, CEO of Brooklyn label Dirty Money Entertainment, signed Minaj to his label in 2007 under a 180-day contract. Originally using the stage name Nicki Maraj, she eventually changed it to Nicki Minaj after Fendi switched her last name when he met her due to her having a "nasty flow".
Minaj released her first mixtape, Playtime Is Over, on July 5, 2007, and her second, Sucka Free, on April 12, 2008. She released her third mixtape, Beam Me Up Scotty, on April 18, 2009; it received favorable coverage on BET and MTV. At the time, she was managed by Debra Antney. One of its tracks, "I Get Crazy", reached number 20 on the U.S. Billboard Hot Rap Songs chart and number 37 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. After Minaj was discovered by fellow rapper Lil Wayne, she signed a recording contract with his Young Money Entertainment. That November, she appeared with Gucci Mane and Trina on the remix of "5 Star Bitch" by Yo Gotti.
In early February 2010, Minaj made her first two appearances on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart with her features on "Knockout" and "Up Out My Face" by Lil Wayne and Mariah Carey respectively. Minaj also appeared on "BedRock" and "Roger That" on the compilation album, We Are Young Money (2009). The singles peaked at numbers two and 56, respectively, in the U.S. Their parent album reached number nine on the U.S. Billboard 200, and was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). At Jay-Z's suggestion, Robin Thicke featured Minaj on his single "Shakin' It 4 Daddy". Allison Stewart of The Washington Post stated that, during that time, she "became the go-to girl for artists who wanted to add some skank to their tracks without sullying themselves in the process". Minaj became the first female solo artist to have seven singles simultaneously charting in the U.S.

2010–2011: Breakthrough with Pink Friday
On March 29, 2010, Minaj released "Massive Attack" featuring Sean Garrett. Intended as the lead single from her forthcoming debut album, Pink Friday, the song was dropped from the album due to poor commercial performance. The next single, "Your Love", later became the album's lead single. Released in June, it peaked at number 14 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 and number one on the Rap Songs chart. The rapper was then featured on Christina Aguilera's song "Woohoo", which reached number 46 on the Canadian Hot 100 and number 79 on Billboard Hot 100. In September, Minaj released "Check It Out" with will.i.am and "Right Thru Me" as follow-up singles.
In October, Minaj was featured on Kanye West's "Monster", a posse cut with Jay-Z and Rick Ross featuring vocals from Justin Vernon of Bon Iver. Her verse received widespread acclaim with many critics regarding it as the best verse on that song. Complex rated Minaj's "Monster" verse as the number-one best rap verse in the past five years, while Sean Fennessey of The Village Voice stated that "Monster" was "the track that announced Minaj's "brilliance" to most people." Shortly after, she performed "Monster" with West and Jay-Z at Yankee Stadium, becoming the first ever female rapper to perform there. In November 2010, Minaj received her first Grammy Award nomination for her guest verse on Ludacris' song "My Chick Bad".
Pink Friday was released on November 19, 2010, debuting at number two and later reaching number one on the Billboard 200, with first-week sales of 375,000 copies. It had the largest sales week for a female rap album in the 21st century and second-highest sales week overall after Lauryn Hill's The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill (1998). The album also became the female rap album with the most weeks in the top ten on the Billboard 200 chart at the time, with fourteen consecutive weeks in the region. Upon release, the album received generally positive reviews from critics. The song "Roman's Revenge", featuring Eminem, was interpreted as a response to rapper Lil' Kim's comments against Minaj, including her accusing Minaj of copying her image and that she had recorded a song called "Everywhere We Go" with Minaj but it was pulled from iTunes by Cash Money because it did not perform well. At the time, Minaj said that "Roman's Revenge" was not about a specific person, but about "everyone who has been in interviews talking", adding, "I’ve been quiet for such a long time and I’ve been the nice guy. I’ve been the person that gave everyone their props ... you can’t be a rapper and not speak on things being said about you". In a 2018 interview, she explained that she wrote the song after "a veteran got at me, and I hit them with 'Roman's Revenge' and then I kept on going."

Pink Friday was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) in December 2010, for moving a million units in the United States, with it becoming the first album by a solo female rapper to go platinum in seven years. As of March 2016, it has been certified triple-platinum. In 2022, the album was included in Rolling Stone's list of "200 Greatest Hip-Hop Albums of All Time" at number 31; the magazine stated that Pink Friday "proved you could own the charts without dialing back your confrontational individuality, and it set the table for a generation of artists." In 2024, Vibe named it as one of the "50 Greatest Black Albums of the Modern Era". "Moment 4 Life" featuring Drake was released as the fourth single from Pink Friday, on December 7, 2010. It reached number 13 on the Hot 100. Minaj performed "Right Thru Me" and "Moment 4 Life" as the musical guest on the January 29, 2011, episode of Saturday Night Live. In February 2011, Lil' Kim released the mixtape Black Friday referencing Minaj, including artwork that showed Lil' Kim decapitating Minaj with a sword and the lyrics "sweetie, you goin' on your 14th minute of fame" and "you a Lil' Kim wannabe". Lil' Kim sold the mixtape on PayPal. Minaj's track "Tragedy" was released online, featuring the lyrics "Pink Friday, Eminem, 8 Mile/ It must hurt to sell your album on PayPal."
"Super Bass" was released as Pink Friday's fifth single in April 2011. It became a sleeper hit and commercially successful, ultimately peaking at number three on the Hot 100. It was eventually certified 12-times platinum in the US, for selling 12 million units; it became the highest-certified song by a female rapper in RIAA history. "Super Bass" was the highest-charting solo single by a female rapper, at the time, since Missy Elliott's "Work It" in 2002. In 2017, Billboard ranked it as the second-biggest US Hot 100 hit by a female rapper of all time (behind Iggy Azalea's "Fancy"); and in 2024, ranked it as the biggest Hot 100 hit of Minaj's career. Its music video has over 1 billion views on YouTube, as of October 2024.
Minaj was one of the opening acts on Britney Spears' 2011 Femme Fatale Tour. She and Kesha appeared on the remix of Spears' "Till the World Ends", which peaked at number three in the U.S. On August 7, 2011, Minaj experienced a wardrobe malfunction during a live performance on Good Morning America when she revealed her left nipple. Both ABC and Minaj apologized for the incident, with Minaj denying it was a publicity stunt. Minaj continued to perform at high-profile events throughout 2011 with Donatella Versace inviting her to perform with Prince for the introduction of a Versace collection for H&M. She also performed "Super Bass" at the 2011 Victoria's Secret Fashion Show. In December 2011, Minaj was nominated for three Grammy Awards, including Best New Artist and Best Rap Album for Pink Friday. Also that year, she won the MTV Video Music Award for Best Hip-Hop Video for "Super Bass", marking her first VMA win.

2012–2013: Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded and American Idol
"Starships" was released in February 2012 as the lead single from Minaj's forthcoming second album, Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded. The song reached number five on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100, and went on to become the fifth best-selling single of 2012. Her crossover into pop music was criticized by some, despite her commercial success. Follow-up singles "Beez in the Trap" featuring 2 Chainz and "Right by My Side" featuring Chris Brown were released shortly after.
Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded was eventually released on April 2, 2012, two months later than initially planned. It was preceded by the promotional singles "Roman in Moscow" and "Stupid Hoe". The latter song was viewed by critics as a diss aimed at Lil' Kim, following her previous attacks on Minaj. The album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200, with first-week sales of 253,000 copies, and was certified two-times platinum by the RIAA in March 2016. However, the mix of hip-hop songs and mainstream pop material received mixed reviews. "Pound the Alarm" and "Va Va Voom" were later released as the final singles from the album. Minaj along with fellow rapper M.I.A. joined Madonna to perform the single, "Give Me All Your Luvin" during the Super Bowl XLVI halftime show on February 6, 2012. Minaj was the first solo female rapper to perform at the Grammy Awards, performing "Roman Holiday" during the 2012 ceremony on February 12. Her exorcism-themed performance was controversial, with the American Catholic League and its president criticizing her performance.
Minaj began her headlining Pink Friday Tour on May 16, 2012, which was followed by the Pink Friday: Reloaded Tour beginning October 14, 2012. Although she was scheduled to headline the June 3 Hot 97 Summer Jam at MetLife Stadium in New Jersey, at the request of Lil Wayne she canceled her appearance the day of the show after Peter Rosenberg of the station dismissed her single "Starships" as "not real hip-hop". The following month, she voiced Steffie in the animated film Ice Age: Continental Drift (2012). Minaj won awards for Best Female Video (for "Starships") at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards and Best Hip-Hop at the 2012 MTV Europe Music Awards.
An expanded version of Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded, subtitled The Re-Up, was released on November 19, 2012, with seven new songs. That month, she was the subject of a three-part E! documentary titled Nicki Minaj: My Truth. In September, Minaj joined the judges' panel for the twelfth season of American Idol with Mariah Carey, Keith Urban, and Randy Jackson. Throughout the show there were disagreements between Carey and Minaj, with both of them leaving the series at the end of the season.

2014–2017: The Pinkprint and acting ventures
Minaj's first live-action theatrical film The Other Woman was filmed in spring 2013 and premiered on April 25, 2014. As she was working on her third studio album The Pinkprint, she described the album as "a continuation of The Re-Up with a lot more" and said it would focus on her "hip hop roots". During an MTV interview, she additionally said that it would be "next level" and that she has "much to talk about".

"Pills n Potions" was released as the lead single from The Pinkprint in May 2014. In July, she appeared on the song "Bang Bang" with singers Jessie J and Ariana Grande, which peaked at number three on the US Billboard Hot 100 and marked Minaj's first number-one on the UK singles chart. "Bang Bang" was certified diamond by the RIAA in May 2024, for recognized sales of 10 million units; it became the first all-female collaboration to achieve the certification. Its music video has over 2 billion views on YouTube, as of July 2024. "Anaconda" was released in August as the second single from the album, peaking at number two, which became her highest-charting single in the US at the time. Its ascent from number 39 to number two in its third week marked the second-biggest jump within the chart's top 40 region, at the time. The music video for "Anaconda" went viral upon release online; it set a 24-hour Vevo record, accumulating 19.6 million views on its first day of release, breaking the record previously held by Miley Cyrus for "Wrecking Ball". It has over 1.1 billion views on YouTube, as of August 2024. On November 9, 2014, Minaj hosted the 2014 MTV Europe Music Awards in Glasgow, Scotland. She also won the Best Hip-Hop Award for a second time. The Pinkprint was officially released on December 15, 2014, and debuted at number two in the U.S., with first week sales of 244,000 equivalent units (198,000 in pure album sales and 46,000 combined album-equivalent units and streams). Upon release, critics praised the production and personal lyrics.At the 58th Grammy Awards, Minaj received three more Grammy Award nominations, including a second Best Rap Album nomination for The Pinkprint, a Best Rap Song nomination for "Anaconda" and a Best Pop Duo/Group Performance nomination for "Bang Bang". In March 2015, Minaj embarked on her third world tour entitled The Pinkprint Tour and also became the first female artist to chart four songs simultaneously in the top 10 of Billboard's Mainstream R&B/Hip-Hop airplay chart. At the 2015 BET Awards, Minaj won her sixth consecutive award for Best Female Hip-Hop Artist, becoming the female rapper with most wins in that category. In August 2015, Madame Tussauds unveiled a wax figure of Minaj, which depicted a pose from the "Anaconda" music video. The attraction received criticism from some, including Angharad Welsh of The Independent, who called it "a sexist, racist mistake". Despite this, Minaj voiced her approval of the wax figure on social media.
In May 2015, it was announced that Minaj would feature in the third installment of the Barbershop film series, alongside Ice Cube, Cedric the Entertainer, Eve, and other original cast members. Titled Barbershop: The Next Cut, the film was released on April 15, 2016. For Minaj's performance as a "sassy" hairdresser named Draya, she was nominated for a Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie Actress: Comedy. In September 2015, it was announced that Minaj would executive produce and appear in a scripted single-camera comedy series for ABC Family (now Freeform) based on her life growing up in Queens, New York City. The show was titled Nicki and the pilot episode was filmed in Minaj's hometown in January 2016. In October 2016, Minaj stated the filming was postponed for undisclosed reasons. In January 2017, she announced that she had ended her relationship with Meek Mill.
In February 2017, Minaj featured on Gucci Mane's song "Make Love" and Jason Derulo's single "Swalla" alongside Ty Dolla Sign, the latter of which reached the top ten in several countries, including a peak of number six in the UK. Rapper Remy Ma released the diss track "Shether", which, among other claims and insults, alleged that Minaj used a ghostwriter and was in a 360-record deal. The track's release followed interviews where Remy Ma had praised Minaj, rapped over a couple of Minaj's songs, and released tracks that media interpreted as digs at Minaj. Remy Ma also released a second diss track aimed at Minaj, "Another One". Minaj responded in her single "No Frauds", featuring Drake and Lil Wayne, in which, among other digs, she took shots at Remy Ma's prison stint for assault, called her a "fraud committin' perjury", and accused her of using a ghostwriter, referring to her husband, rapper Papoose; Minaj also rapped "I never signed a 360, bitch you wild dumb". On her Instagram post promoting the song, Minaj wrote: "Great diss records can’t be lies. Great diss records are FACTS ... Been writing my own raps since I was 11.". "No Frauds" was one of three songs Minaj released simultaneously, along with "Changed It" and "Regret in Your Tears". On March 20, 2017, with the three songs she released, Minaj broke the record for the most Billboard Hot 100 entries for a female artist, which at the time was previously held by Aretha Franklin. That month, Minaj also signed with the major modeling agency, Wilhelmina Models.
In May 2017, Minaj opened the 2017 Billboard Music Awards with a medley performance that was described by Elias Leight of Rolling Stone as "flamboyantly produced" and "dexterous". Throughout the remainder of 2017, Minaj performed guest verses on several singles, including Migos' "MotorSport" and Yo Gotti's "Rake It Up", both of which peaked inside the top ten in the U.S. at numbers six and eight, respectively. She also featured on Katy Perry's "Swish Swish", which was certified platinum in the U.S. and Canada. She briefly dated rapper Nas in 2017 before they broke up in January 2018.

2018–2019: Queen
After a social media hiatus, Minaj released two singles from her fourth studio album Queen. She released "Chun-Li" and "Barbie Tingz" simultaneously on April 12, 2018, with both reaching number ten and number twenty-five in the US respectively. She performed "Chun-Li" on Saturday Night Live and the 2018 BET Awards. While "Chun Li" appears on the tracklist of the album, "Barbie Tingz" is only included on the Target version of the album. On the red carpet of the 2018 Met Gala, she announced the title of the album and the original release date. "Rich Sex" featuring Lil Wayne was released on June 11, 2018, as the first promotional single from Queen. The second single, "Bed", featuring Ariana Grande was released on June 14, 2018, alongside the album pre-order, reaching number 42 on the Hot 100. Additionally, Minaj appeared as a featured artist on the song "Fefe" along with Murda Beatz and Tekashi 6ix9ine. It debuted at number four in the US, marking Minaj's highest debut on the chart at the time, besting the sixth place start of "Bang Bang" in 2014. It later peaked at number three and was added to Queen in the middle of its first tracking week. The day before the album's release, Minaj launched her own Beats 1 (now branded as Apple Music 1) radio show, Queen Radio. It became the most-listened radio show on Apple Music in 2019, and ran for 17 episodes till February 2020. Guests on the show included Ariana Grande, 50 Cent, and Chance the Rapper, among others.Queen received multiple delays before finally being released on August 10, 2018. It debuted at number two on the U.S. Billboard 200 with 185,000 album-equivalent units, of which 78,000 came from pure album sales. It also debuted at number five in the UK and at number four in Australia, marking Minaj's highest debut in the latter country. Minaj later expressed frustration and criticized several people including Travis Scott, whose album Astroworld claimed the top spot for a second week in a row, blocking Queen from the top spot. Minaj alleged that Travis Scott sold shirts, merchandise, and ticket passes for an unnannounced tour to boost his album sales. This controversy and Queen's roll-out was documented by several news outlets and commentators. Queen received generally positive reviews, with some critics deriding the album's length and direction. The album was certified Platinum by the RIAA in January 2019, for moving over 1 million equivalent units.
Minaj performed at the 2018 MTV Video Music Awards where she also won her fourth MTV Video Music Award for the "Chun-Li" music video. The same month, she featured on the remix of "Idol" by South Korean boy band BTS. It debuted and peaked at number eleven in the U.S. which was the group's second highest-charting song at the time. She also featured on the song "Woman Like Me" by British girl group Little Mix, which was released on October 12, 2018. A music video was shortly released after, with Minaj and Little Mix later performing the song together at the 2018 MTV Europe Music Awards. She was also featured on "Dip" by American rapper Tyga which reached number sixty-three in the U.S. making her the first female artist to have 100 entries on the Billboard Hot 100 chart. She later attended the year-end Billboard Women in Music event, receiving the Game Changer Award for the accomplishment.
In September, Minaj co-headlined the annual Made in America Festival and suffered another wardrobe malfunction when the front of her outfit fell open. In November, she was invited to the DWP music festival in China but did not perform due to problems with the company hosting the event. The next year in April 2019, Minaj made a surprise guest appearance at the 2019 Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival during Ariana Grande's set where they performed their collaborations "Side to Side" and "Bang Bang". However, she experienced technical difficulties with her earpiece. Later that month, Minaj parted ways with her longtime management team after a mutual agreement, with American entertainment executive Irving Azoff serving as her new manager.
In June 2019, Minaj released a standalone single titled "Megatron" along with an accompanying music video. In the U.S., the song debuted at number twenty. A month later, she provided information on her upcoming fifth studio album, appearing on The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon, stating that "there's definitely a new album, of course." She featured on the song "Hot Girl Summer" alongside fellow female rapper Megan Thee Stallion in August 2019, which reached number eleven in the U.S.  Minaj had a voice role as Pinky in The Angry Birds Movie 2, which was released in August 2019. In November, Minaj appeared on the Charlie's Angels: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack on the song "Bad To You", along with Ariana Grande and Normani, marking her sixth collaboration with Grande. Minaj also collaborated with Colombian singer Karol G on the song "Tusa", which was released to streaming platforms on November 7. The song reached forty-two in the U.S. and reached the top of many other charts including the "Hot Latin Songs" chart, which made it the first song with two lead female artists to debut in such position. "Tusa" later became the longest-running number one single in Argentina, spending five months on the top of the chart.

2020–2021: Beam Me Up Scotty re-release
In January 2020, Minaj was featured on "Nice to Meet Ya" by American singer-songwriter Meghan Trainor. In February, she released a standalone song called "Yikes" as a promotional single. By the end of that month, Minaj appeared as a guest judge on the twelfth season's premiere of the reality television show RuPaul's Drag Race.  In May, fellow rapper Doja Cat announced a collaboration with Minaj on two remixes of her song "Say So". The remix later debuted at number one on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100, becoming both Minaj and Doja Cat's first single to reach number one in the U.S. It became the first all-female collaboration that had reached number one in the U.S. since "Fancy" by Australian rapper Iggy Azalea featuring English singer Charli XCX did it in 2014. It marked the first time that a song by two female rappers reached the top, for which Guinness World Records later gave them an award. A month later, she released a collaboration with 6ix9ine called "Trollz", which debuted at number one in the U.S. becoming her second number one single. This made her the first female rapper to debut at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 since Lauryn Hill did so in 1998 with "Doo Wop (That Thing)".
Minaj featured on singer Ty Dolla Sign's track "Expensive". She continued to appear as a featured artist on several songs in late 2020 and released "What That Speed Bout!?" with producer Mike Will Made It and rapper YoungBoy Never Broke Again on November 6. On the 10th anniversary of her debut album Pink Friday (2010), Minaj announced a six-part docuseries about her, produced by Bron Studios and was originally said to premiere on HBO Max. In 2022, the streaming platform confirmed it dropped the still-unreleased project.
In May 2021, Minaj released a reissue of her mixtape Beam Me Up Scotty (2009), including new songs previously unavailable on streaming services. The reissue debuted at number two on the U.S. Billboard 200, which gave it the highest debut for a female rap mixtape in the U.S. A song from the reissue, titled "Seeing Green" featuring fellow Young Money rappers Drake and Lil Wayne reached number twelve in the U.S. In July, Minaj collaborated with fellow rapper Bia on the remix of her song Whole Lotta Money. In September, Minaj collaborated with English singer-songwriter Elton John's fifth collaboration album The Lockdown Sessions (2021). She appeared on the song "Always Love You" with John and rapper Young Thug. Later that month, she split with her previous manager Irving Azoff and is now being managed by Wassim Slaiby, also known by his management company SALXCO, who is best known for managing The Weeknd and Doja Cat. English singer Jesy Nelson released her solo debut, called "Boyz", which Minaj features on. The song peaked at number four in the UK and number sixteen in Ireland. In October 2021, Minaj appeared as a surprise host for the season six reunion of the reality television show The Real Housewives of Potomac. In November 2021, her 2011 Pink Friday single "Super Bass" received a Diamond certification by the RIAA, making her the second solo female rapper to receive a diamond certification. Minaj won the Best Hip Hop award in the MTV Europe Music Awards 2021, becoming the sixth time she has won this award.

2022–present: Pink Friday 2
After a social media hiatus, Minaj released a song collaboration with rapper Lil Baby titled "Do We Have a Problem?" on February 4, 2022. She stated that the song evoked the "natural essence of rap". The track was accompanied with a music video that featured guest appearances from actors Joseph Sikora and Cory Hardrict. "Do We Have a Problem" debuted at number two on the US Billboard Hot 100, marking Minaj's 20th top-ten. On the Billboard Global 200, it debuted at number seven, earning Minaj her first top-ten on the chart. The single's video contained a snippet of another Lil Baby collaboration titled "Bussin", released a week later, on February 11. In a promotional Apple Music interview with DJ Zane Lowe, Minaj said her forthcoming fifth studio album was "coming very soon". She described it as "fun, gutta, and back to the basics". In March, Minaj announced that her radio show Queen Radio would be revived and broadcast on Amp, a live audio service by Amazon. The show premiered on August 11 on Amp; episodes were made available on Amazon Music after airing live. It was discontinued in October 2023, as a result of the closure of Amp.
In March, Minaj and fellow rapper Coi Leray's collaboration "Blick Blick", was released—from the former's debut studio album, Trendsetter (2022). Minaj revealed that her verse was almost scrapped due to American rapper Benzino (who is also Coi Leray's father) leaking the collaboration. Later that month, she surprise-released the standalone single "We Go Up" featuring rapper Fivio Foreign. The drill track was initially teased on Minaj's social media as a scrapped song from her album, before fans had requested her to release the song. In April, Minaj appeared on English television host James Corden's Carpool Karaoke segment, kickstarting the return of its broadcast on The Late Late Show with James Corden after a two-year hiatus.
In early July, Minaj headlined the 2022 editions of Essence Music Festival in New Orleans and the Wireless Festival in London. On July 28 she released a two-minute trailer of her upcoming six-part docu-series titled "Nicki", produced by Canadian production company Bron Studios. In August, Minaj released "Super Freaky Girl" as the lead single of her upcoming fifth studio album. The track samples American singer Rick James's 1981 song, "Super Freak." After its initial release, "Super Freaky Girl" received an extended version called the "Roman Remix", which features the return of her alter ego Roman Zolanski.
"Super Freaky Girl" debuted atop the Billboard Hot 100, marking Minaj's third U.S. number-one and her first unaccompanied chart-topper. It became the first solo song by a female rapper to debut at number one in the U.S. in 22 years, since fellow rapper Lauryn Hill's song "Doo Wop (That Thing)" in 1998. Later in August, Minaj released a compilation album titled Queen Radio: Volume 1 with one new track, "Likkle Miss (Remix)" with Skeng. In September, she released a remix of "Super Freaky Girl" called "Queen Mix", which features 5 other female rappers: JT, Bia, Katie Got Bandz, Akbar V, and Maliibu Miitch.
Also in September, Yung Bleu released his single "Love in the Way" featuring Minaj. In October, Minaj and Skeng released a remix of "Likkle Miss" called "The Fine Nine Remix" featuring Spice, Destra Garcia, Patrice Roberts, Lady Leshurr, Pamputtae, Dovey Magnum, Lisa Mercedez, and London Hill. Minaj spoke on Instagram Live about her frustration with her song "Super Freaky Girl" being placed in the pop categories instead of rap for the 65th Annual Grammy Awards. Minaj said that if the song was not considered fitting for the rap category, Latto's "Big Energy", which has the same producer, should also not be in the category. Minaj argued that her song was moved to pop to have less competition in the rap categories, alleging that it is part of a general corporate agenda to prop up newer artists over veterans. She added that she would have no problem with it being moved from rap to pop if they were "all being treated fairly". Later that month, rapper YoungBoy Never Broke Again released a collaboration with Minaj titled "I Admit". In November 2022, Minaj collaborated with Lebanese singer Myriam Fares and Colombian singer Maluma on "Tukoh Taka" which was the official FIFA Fan Festival anthem.
On March 3, 2023, Minaj released "Red Ruby da Sleeze" as the second single from her upcoming album. The song samples Lumidee's 2003 single "Never Leave You (Uh Oooh, Uh Oooh)". It debuted and peaked at number thirteen on the Billboard Hot 100 and debuted atop the Digital Songs and Hot Rap Songs charts. On March 5, Minaj appeared as a surprise performer during Lil Wayne's set at the 2023 Rolling Loud California festival. In April 2023, Minaj featured on "WTF," the lead single from YoungBoy Never Broke Again's third studio album, Don't Try This At Home. She teamed up with Ice Spice on the remix to the latter's song "Princess Diana", released on April 14, 2023—the first-ever release on Minaj's record label, Heavy On It. The remix became the first collaboration between two women to top the Hot Rap Songs chart and made Minaj the woman with the most number-ones on the chart (10). It peaked at number four on the Hot 100 and atop the Digital Song Sales chart. Minaj's next collaboration was German singer Kim Petras's "Alone", released on April 21. It samples "Better Off Alone" (1999) by Alice Deejay. The single reached the top 40 in the United Kingdom. In May, she featured on "Pound Town 2", the remix to St. Louis rapper Sexyy Red and Tay Keith's single, "Pound Town". It reached the summit of the Digital Songs chart.
On June 5, 2023, Minaj announced via Twitter that her fifth studio album would be released on October 20, 2023. On June 30, she announced the album's title, Pink Friday 2, via her social media, and that the release date was rescheduled to November 17. The album was ultimately pushed back to and released on December 8, 2023. Pink Friday 2 debuted atop the Billboard 200, with 228,000 album-equivalent units—Minaj's first album in over 11 years to do so. It made her the female rapper with the most U.S. number-one albums (3) in chart history, surpassing Foxy Brown. The record earned the largest sales week (overall and pure) of the decade for a rap album by a woman and for an R&B/hip-hop album by a woman of 2023. It garnered the highest first-week vinyl sales for a female rap album in U.S. history. Additionally, Pink Friday 2 achieved the largest streaming week for a female rap album of the decade, and for a female R&B/hip-hop album of 2023. Globally, it broke the record for the most single-day streams for a female hip-hop title on Spotify. 14 tracks from the album debuted on the Billboard Hot 100, of which two charted in the top 40—"Everybody" featuring Lil Uzi Vert and "Needle" featuring Drake. Aided by "Everybody", "FTCU", and "Barbie Dangerous", Minaj tied Kanye West for the third-most top-tens (50) on Hot Rap Songs. Multiple deluxe editions of Pink Friday 2 were released. It became Minaj's fifth album to be certified platinum.
Also in June 2023, she and Ice Spice released their second collaboration, "Barbie World" with europop band Aqua, from the Barbie film soundtrack. The song samples Aqua's 1997 single, "Barbie Girl". Peaking at number seven on the Hot 100 and atop Digital Song Sales, it extended her record as the female rapper with the most U.S. top-tens (23) and number-ones on the latter chart (16). Minaj made guest appearances on Young Thug and Lil Uzi Vert's albums, Business Is Business and Pink Tape, on the songs: "Money" with the late Juice Wrld, and the U.S. top-20 "Endless Fashion". "Last Time I Saw You" was released on September 1, 2023, as the third single from Pink Friday 2. It made Minaj the act with the most number-ones (25) on the R&B/Hip-Hop Digital Song Sales, surpassing Drake. On September 12, she hosted the 2023 MTV Video Music Awards, marking her second consecutive year in the role. In October, Minaj released "Bahm Bahm", an outtake of Pink Friday 2, as a limited-time website exclusive. Pirated versions of the song were uploaded to streaming services and entered the Apple Music charts, before being taken down. The song ultimately made the final tracklist and was released as part of the album. Days later, she released "For All the Barbz", her freestyle of Drake's "All the Parties" (featuring Chief Keef), exclusively via her YouTube channel. With the 2023 MTV Europe Music Awards, she became the first black artist and female rapper to win Best U.S. Act in the award show's history. An extended remix of the Pink Friday 2 track "Beep Beep", featuring 50 Cent, was released as a promotional single from the album on December 12, 2023. Also in December, Minaj performed on the Atlanta and Miami dates of iHeartRadio's Jingle Ball Tour 2023. She was originally set to perform on the Chicago date but canceled her headlining slot due to the then-forthcoming release of Pink Friday 2, which resulted in Lil Wayne replacing her on the lineup. She conducted a New Year's Eve concert at the E11Even nightclub in Miami.
In January 2024, "Everybody" and "FTCU" were released as subsequent singles from Pink Friday 2. The tracks eventually reached the top 25 and top 15 on the Hot 100. "FTCU" topped the Digital Songs, R&B/Hip-Hop Digital Song Sales, and Hot Rap Digital Song Sales charts, becoming Minaj's 17th, 26th, and 22nd number-ones on the tallies. On January 26, Megan Thee Stallion released the song "Hiss", which was believed to include jabs at Minaj and her husband. Soon after, Minaj did an Instagram live where she previewed a rap she made on the live, titled "Big Foot", which was released on January 28. Minaj tweeted that she was releasing an a cappella version so that "other producers all around the world can make their own beat", and stated that she wrote five other songs addressing the matter. Minaj commented on having an issue with Megan since she allegedly tried to persuade Minaj to consume alcohol while trying to conceive a child and to get an abortion. "Big Foot" was poorly received by critics, who criticized the production and the shots at Megan for lacking quality. The song broke first-day records for the highest solo female rap debut in Apple Music history, and the biggest solo female rap debut on Spotify and YouTube in 2024. It debuted with 4.1 million on-demand streams, then fell off quickly in streams, garnering 1.1 million plays in the last day of the track week; it debuted at number 23 on the Billboard Hot 100. The song extended Minaj's record as the female rapper with the most, and woman with the second-most, top-tens (46) on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, behind Aretha Franklin (52).
A remix of Minaj's song "FTCU", titled the "Sleeze Mix", featuring Travis Scott, Chris Brown, and Sexyy Red, was released in April. Minaj was nominated for Best Rap Song and Best Song Written for Visual Media for "Barbie World" at the 66th Annual Grammy Awards. She led the nominations among women for the BET Awards 2024, with six; she won Best Female Hip Hop Artist—her seventh win in the category, and first since 2016—while Pink Friday 2 was nominated for Album of the Year. 
In support of Pink Friday 2, Minaj embarked on its namesake world tour, her most extensive tour yet. It began on March 1, 2024, in Oakland, California, and concluded on October 11, 2024, in Elmont, New York. The tour included Minaj's headlining slots at ten festivals. Spanning 79 shows across North America, Europe, and Africa, it became the highest-grossing tour by a female rapper in history and the fourth-highest-grossing tour by a rapper or hip-hop artist, with over $108 million in revenue. Minaj was set to release a deluxe version of Pink Friday 2, titled Gag City Reloaded, but announced in September 2024 that she had scrapped it in favor of making her sixth studio album, Pink Friday 3, which she would announce in the near future.

Artistry
Musical style and lyrics
Minaj is known for her animated rap flow, witty lyrics, and musical versatility. Her rapping is distinctive for its varying cadence and speed, and use of alter egos and accents, including British cockney. Minaj said in 2010: "I want to be a balanced artist ... this is all years of me learning me and my style, and deciding to do something different that would get everyone's attention." Her background in performing arts contributed to her vocal approach and overall artistry. She said that rapping is both an art and a sport to her, she enjoys changing up her rap flow, and sometimes spends hours revising her work. "I love that people never know what Nicki they are going to get on a particular song. I like bringing out a different side."
Minaj has made use of metaphors, punch lines, and word play. She often incorporates personas, using different accents or cadences. Marc Hogan of Spin said that through her character Roman, Minaj "tap[ped] into the fire-breathing, giddily nihilistic spirit that drew so many rap heads to her mixtapes ... as well as her guest appearances on others' tracks. Jon Caramanica of The New York Times called Minaj a "nimble, evocative rapper" and "intricate lyricist" with a "gift for comic accents and unexpected turns of phrase. She's a walking exaggeration, outsize in sound, personality and look. And she's a rapid evolver, discarding old modes as easily as adopting new ones." PopMatters' Nick Soulsby called  her lyrics and delivery "a firework display of sharp metaphors, humorous comebacks and putdowns, a rainbow of emotion backed up by a talent for wordplay", adding that "while many rappers lean into a single style from start-to-end of a song — or even a career — Minaj is alive to the potential of her performances and challenges herself on the mic". Writing for Paper magazine, Liza Dye said that Minaj's first mixtape "established her lyrical talent and knack for creating a colorful world filled with witty rap references, vocal impressions and memorable characters." The New York Times' Roxane Gay characterized Minaj's work by "urgent lyrics, spitting in a range of voices and accents", containing "wit and sly humor", and her raps ranging "from bold and aggressive, to coquettish, to wanton and sultry, with a soupçon of women’s empowerment", while her pace "is often breathless but her diction is impeccable."
AllMusic described her artistry as a "unique combination of ferocity and humor, and a rap style built on razor-sharp wordplay, mercilessly blunt lyricism, and delivery that turns on a dime from sugary to snarling". Evening Standard's Jochan Embley wrote that her lyrics "stare gender and race in the eye", and are "fierce, hilarious, bombastic and deadly serious, often all bundled together in one. If she's not taking aim at other rappers ... she's promoting body confidence or providing a commentary on social issues." Complex said that Minaj has written bars that are "as insulting as they [are] clever", and praised her versatility as a rapper "with varied flows, ranging from sing-song to pummeling, and lines as personal as they [are] provocative", noting that "she could go as pop as she wants, but for Minaj, it all returns to rap." Tara Colley of The Conversation described Minaj as a "pre-eminent female rapper", writing that she "consistently straddled the distinct personas of gangsta boss and sexy pop siren without truly committing to either" and her "chameleonic ability" yields debate on which version of Minaj rap fans prefer. Writing for Esquire, Terron Moore said that one of Minaj's traits as an artist is her "fearlessness", a staple of "Nicki the Lyricist, the venomous, schizophrenic man eater who out-pens her male competitors, and her trail of guest verses". Robby Seabrook III of XXL included Minaj in a list of "most unique flows from rappers over the last five years", writing that she "has solidified her spot as a leader of the pack for her animated flows, inspiring many other women in hip-hop to play with their vocals. She goes from campy to bellicose, excited to eccentric, oftentimes all on one song."
As a hip hop artist, Minaj's discography comprises various styles and sounds, and she sometimes includes singing in her music. Several of her albums have been described as "genre-bending". Minaj occasionally lends herself to electronic music genres, with Pink Friday marking her exploration of the genre, spawning the electropop-laden "Super Bass". Also combining hip hop with electronic music, Minaj's second album, Pink Friday Roman Reloaded, has several electro-rap and electro pop songs including "Roman Holiday", "Beez in the Trap", and "Starships". Zoe Johnson of XXL, stated in 2021 that in recent years Minaj's "beat selection has moved to refined production full of grit and hip-hop flare". Her fifth album Pink Friday 2 incorporates drill, pop, dancehall, afrobeats, R&B, Jersey club, and trap.

Alter egos
With her parents frequently fighting during her childhood, Minaj lived through characters she created as a means of escape. She recalled that "fantasy was my reality" and her first identity was Cookie. She then moved on to Harajuku Barbie and, later, Nicki Minaj. In November 2010, Minaj assumed the alter ego Nicki Teresa, wearing a colorful headdress and calling herself "healer to her fans" during a visit to the Garden of Dreams Foundation at Fuse Studios in New York. She introduced another alter ego, Rosa (pronounced with an exaggerated R), to commemorate her December 2010 appearance on Lopez Tonight.
One of Minaj's most well-known alter-egos is Roman Zolanski, who Minaj described as a "demon", a "lunatic", and a gay boy that lives inside of her. On "Roman's Revenge", Minaj and Eminem collaborated as their respective alter egos Roman and Slim Shady. Minaj also introduced the character of Roman's proper British mother, Martha, in "Roman's Revenge". In December 2023, in response to a fan inquiry on Martha ever returning, Minaj confirmed that Martha had died of old age. Minaj's other personas in her music include Chun-Li and Queen Sleeze.

Influences
Minaj cites Lil Wayne, Foxy Brown, Jay-Z, and Biggie as major influences. She called Lil Wayne her mentor, crediting him with discovering her and stating, "I can't even imagine my career, my creative spirit without Wayne". On Foxy Brown and Jay-Z, Minaj said: "I really loved [Foxy] as a female rapper. I was really interested in her mind and her aura, [and] I was really, really into Jay-Z. Me and my friends in high school, we were reciting all of the Jay lyrics." She deemed Foxy Brown "the most influential female rapper" for her.
Lauryn Hill is also one of Minaj's major influences, with Minaj quoting her lyrics in a high school yearbook. She also cited as inspirations R&B singer Monica, Beyoncé, Whitney Houston, Madonna, Enya, Eminem, Lil' Kim, Remy Ma, Missy Elliott, and Left Eye. 
She called Betsey Johnson a fashion inspiration: "[Betsey] is a free spirit. When I met her the other day, I felt like I knew her for my whole life. She's so warm and considerate and caring. She's amazingly talented and I've been wearing her clothes forever." Minaj also expressed appreciation for Cyndi Lauper's style and how her videos inspired her as a teenager: "When I first went to get my hair colored, I was about 14 and I wanted blonde highlights. ... I've always been experimenting. Cyndi Lauper's videos – that's what intrigued me." Other fashion influences include Janet Jackson, Salt-N-Pepa, Grace Jones, Lil' Kim, and Marilyn Monroe. She also mentioned that actress Jada Pinkett Smith was one of her role models.

Public image
Billboard listed Minaj as the fourth-most-active musician on social media on its March 2011 Social 50 chart. She is the most-followed rapper on Instagram with over 228 million followers—the first to surpass 200 million followers—and the 17th-most-followed individual on the social media platform. On Twitter and TikTok, she is the second-most-followed female rapper, with over 28 million and 20 million followers on the apps, respectively, as of September 2024. Minaj is the most-followed female rapper on Facebook, with over 48 million followers.  She was the most-followed rapper on Twitter in 2012. BET has named Minaj as a "gay icon". Minaj was a vocal proponent of streams counting towards an artist's RIAA certifications. The organization later announced in 2016 that it would be modernizing the certification process for albums, including on-demand audio and video streams.
Minaj has been called as a "fashion icon" by Allure, Time, XXL and has been called a "camp style icon" by Refinery29. She has cited Alexander McQueen, Gianni Versace, and Christian Louboutin as her favorite designers. The Huffington Post described her style as "risk-taking" and "far-out", with "bold sartorial choices"; Minaj has been included on the annual Maxim Hot 100 list several times. In 2014, Minaj underwent a reinvention in her image sporting a "natural" and "softer" look, wearing fewer wigs and less colourful costumes. She stated that she "went so far to the other side that there's only one place to go from there. You can either continue doing costumes or you can just say, "Hey guess what? This will shock them even more. Doing nothing will shock them even more"".
Her physique, notably her buttocks, has attracted significant attention from the media. Early in her career, she made autographing breasts part of her movement to empower women. In 2010, she said that although she originally felt obligated to mimic the provocative behavior of the "female rappers of [her] day", she intended to subdue her sexuality because she "[wants] people—especially young girls—to know that in life, nothing is going to be based on sex appeal. You've got to have something else to go with that."
Minaj talked about feminism in an interview with Vogue in 2015, saying "There are things that I do that feminists don't like, and there are things that I do that they do like. I don't label myself. I just say the truth about what I feel. I feel like women can do anything that they put their minds to." In 2018, an interview with Elle, in which she discussed sex workers, her own sex appeal, and sexuality in music and on social media, attracted criticism. In The New York Times Magazine, music critic Vanessa Grigoriadis said that Minaj "has become expert at modelling the ways that women can wield power in the industry. But she has also drawn attention to the ways in which power can be embodied by a woman standing up for herself and speaking her own mind."
The cover art and music video for her 2014 single, "Anaconda", attracted significant media attention upon release. The music video was viewed 19.6 million times in its first 24 hours of release. The Guardian called the video "racy" but noted that she "doesn't shy from ruffling her audience's feathers", while others praised Minaj for "owning her sexuality", examining her work through a feminist perspective. Another writer for The Guardian said, of the "Anaconda" video, Minaj turns "the classic song into a conversation, and [refuses] to let the camera objectify her lap dance by keeping it zoomed out, at a distance."
Throughout Minaj's career, her outspoken views, feuds with several rappers, personal life, and fanbase have received significant media attention. Her fanbase, known as the "Barbz", have been reported as often being militant towards Minaj's critics, including incidents of reported doxxing, cyberbullying, and death threats from some fans.

Philanthropy
In 2010, Minaj performed a cover of "Girls Just Wanna Have Fun", alongside singer Katy Perry, for service members during the 2010 VH1 Divas Salute the Troops concert. The two would later collaborate in 2017 on "Swish Swish". In 2011, Mattel created a Barbie doll with Minaj's likeness to auction for Project Angel Food, a charity that provides food for people afflicted with HIV and AIDS. In 2012, in the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy, Minaj donated $15,000 to the Food Bank For New York City and held a turkey drive at her alma mater, PS 45.
In May 2017, Minaj offered via Twitter to pay college tuition fees and student loans for 30 of her fans. She appeared to grant their requests, ranging from $500 to school supplies to $6,000 for tuition, promising to respond to more requests in a month or two. She also announced that she would launch an official charity for student loans and tuition payments in the near future. In the same month, Minaj revealed on Instagram that she has been donating money to a village in India for a few years via her pastor, Lydia Sloley. These donations helped the village get a computer center, a tailoring institute, a reading program, and two water wells. "This is the kind of thing that makes me feel the most proud", she said about the new additions to the village.
In August 2017, after Hurricane Harvey hit the city of Houston, Texas, Minaj answered a social media challenge by comedian and actor Kevin Hart and donated $25,000 to the Red Cross, saying she was "praying for everyone there". On September 4, 2018, Minaj appeared as a guest and performed several songs on The Ellen DeGeneres Show. Throughout the episode, Minaj and Degeneres, with the participation of Walmart, gave out over $150,000 in donations to fans.
In 2019, Minaj pulled out of headlining a concert in Saudi Arabia following online backlash from activists, after women's rights activist Loujain al-Hathloul was detained and arrested for speaking out against the Saudi regime. Minaj was praised by Thor Halvorssen of The Human Rights Foundation, who criticized her initial plan to perform in a letter, and released a statement saying, "After careful reflection ... I believe it is important for me to make clear my support for the rights of women, the LGBTQ community and freedom of expression."
In 2020, Minaj donated $25,000 to the St. Jude's Home for Girls school after visiting the school in her native country of Trinidad. In a speech, Minaj encouraged the girls to push through hard obstacles, even referencing her own experience with domestic violence: "I've experienced being in a home with domestic violence. I've experienced, you know, being at a very difficult crossroads in my life as a teenager. And sometimes as a teenager when things happen, you feel like there's no up from there." In the same year, following the release of Minaj and 6ix9ine's collaboration, "Trollz", Minaj announced that a portion of the proceeds from the song, along with profits from all merchandise, will go towards the Bail Project amid the Black Lives Matter protests sparked by the murder of George Floyd. In April 2024, Minaj was one of over 200 artists who signed an open letter speaking to and asking for safety from the "predatory use of AI" in the music industry.

Cultural impact
Various publications have referred to Minaj as the "Queen of Rap" and the "Queen of Hip Hop". She is also regarded as one of the most influential rappers of all time. In 2012, Jon Caramanica of The New York Times called Minaj "the most influential female rapper of all time", and in 2015 Vanessa Grigoriadis from its magazine called her "the world's biggest female rap superstar". In 2019, Complex ranked her eighth on their list of best rappers of the 2010s, the only female rapper on the list, calling Minaj "the most important female rapper of this decade—and quite possibly of all time", and a "trendsetter" who "continuously redefin[es] what it means to be a crossover rapper." Minaj was ranked as the tenth-greatest rapper and greatest female rapper of all time on Billboard and Vibe's list of the 50 greatest rappers (2023). Billboard ranked her as the top female rapper on its decade-end chart of the most successful artists of the 2010s. In 2024, the magazine named her the "hottest female rapper", and stated that while "hip-hop has continued to cycle through rappers looking to knock Minaj off the throne", she "remains at the apex of the rap mountain 15 years after the release of her breakout mixtape, Beam Me Up Scotty". The Source described Minaj as "one of the most influential figures in the global music scene", noting that she "has consistently redefined US rap/hip-hop since her debut album Pink Friday".
Minaj's work and career has been deemed groundbreaking by multiple publications. In Evening Standard, Jochan Embley named her one of the most influential rap artists of all time, writing that she "repeatedly [broke] down barriers for female artists in the scene" and "everything she does is bold, fearless and distinct – whether that be her eye-popping stage attire or her expertly delivered lyrics". Sowmya Krishnamurthy of NPR Music said that "in a genre where men dominate the uppermost echelon", Minaj "indelibly changed the landscape for artists in hip-hop for the past decade, showing a complex visage: the ferocious emcee who's just as comfortable being the girl-next-door, glammed-up Barbie doll or rambunctious alter-ego Roman". In 2020, Nick Soulsby of PopMatters called her the "best female rapper and the best rapper of the past ten years – no gender preposition required." Billboard said she "redefined success for women in hip-hop" in the decade. MTV Latin America named her as one of "The Most Influential Women in the History of Music", being the only rapper on the list. In 2024, Billboard ranked Minaj at number 13 on its "Greatest Pop Stars of the 21st Century" list, with Kyle Denis writing she "isn't just the greatest female rapper [...] she's also one of the key architects of how pop music sounds, how pop fandom functions and how pop stars are perceived both online and in real life". Her success as a female rapper "has been a landmark step towards gender equality in the rap industry", Bustle remarked. Nylon writer Demicia Inman said her impact "stands as one of the most successful rappers of the millennium", while she "was required not just to rap well beyond her male peers, but also to be likable. In rejecting respectability politics, [Minaj] in-turn fueled a landmark career", during which she has "battled misogyny and industry bias against black women to carve her own identity and sound" and "highlighted and helped shift double standards".
The New York Times's Caramanica wrote that Minaj "became a nimble, evocative rapper", an "intricate lyricist", a "thoughtful singer", a "risky performer", and "invented new personae." "More than any other rapper in the mainstream, she pushed hard against expectations", becoming "her own watermark". NPR's Erik Nielson said in 2014 that Minaj's "success over the last decade has stood as an exception to the unwritten rule that women rappers no longer have a place among elite artists". Complex stated that "from her bold outfits to her multi-colored wigs, Minaj oozed confidence that inspired others who were watching closely". Glamour included Minaj in its list of 104 women who defined 2010s pop culture. XXL's Zoe Johnson called her "one of the most versatile MCs to bless a mic", and she "helped birth a new generation of rappers that mimic her style and revamp her legendary bars. She's even helped pave the way for a select group of producers looking to create Nicki Minaj-type beats with dope rappers in mind." Writing for The New York Times, Roxane Gay said that Minaj "broadened the definition of hip-hop, making it more joyful, energetic and robust".
Billboard credited Minaj for bringing female rap back to the mainstream in the US. With over 300 features, the magazine called Minaj a "rap and pop icon", adding that "she's been one of popular music's most reliable guest performers, notching dozens of chart hits as a supporting presence on other artists' singles". Complex said Minaj was able "take a simple song and turn it into a smash hit just because she's featured on it". She "made almost a second career" out of her features, and is the female artist in hip hop who has done the most collaborations with lesser-known artists, Forbes stated. While "opting to spend the time and energy to help many acts secure their big break", Minaj also "cemented her status as a superstar—one who can succeed with any type of track." Minaj became the most successful female hip hop artist in history. Michael Saponara of Billboard wrote that she "reaffirmed living legend status" by "hitting the road for the Pink Friday 2 World Tour"—which became the highest-grossing tour by a female rapper and one of the top five highest grossing hip hop tours in history—and proved herself as rap's "centrifugal female force". With the tour, Minaj "etched her name in the annals of music history", The Source noted, while she "leaves behind a legacy of groundbreaking achievements and artistry". 
Minaj fought for streaming to count toward artists' sales and certifications, and is credited with influencing this change in the industry. She has influenced or inspired many artists, including Tinashe, Cher Lloyd, Cupcakke, Billie Eilish, Lil Nas X, Ms Banks, Asian Doll, Doja Cat, Megan Thee Stallion, Latto, Shenseea, BIA, Lakeyah, Luísa Sonza, Coi Leray, Maliibu Miitch, City Girls, Baby Tate, Ice Spice, Rico Nasty, Flo Milli, Ivorian Doll, Angel Haze, Rubi Rose, Saweetie, and Doechii.
Minaj's verse on Kanye West's "Monster" was critically acclaimed, with many critics considering it the best verse in the song. It had a significant role in establishing Minaj as a "top tier talent who dispelled gender distinctions in rap", and was "the first time the conversation was ever about a female out-classing her male contemporaries", Pitchfork stated. The Los Angeles Times named Minaj's verse as one of the 50 greatest moments in hip hop history, writing: "Minaj was already a multiplatinum headliner by the time she laid down her song-stealing verse on Kanye West's all-star romp "Monster" ... Minaj's performance, as much a defiant declaration of women's empowerment as a gloriously unhinged lyrical flex, ranks as one of the most memorable mic drops in rap history." West said that at one point he considered removing her verse from the track, because he was worried it would outshine his own work: "I knew people would say that was the best verse on the best Hip Hop album of all time or arguably top ten albums of all time. ... and people to this day would say to me 'My favorite thing was Nicki Minaj's verse'. So if I let my ego get the best of me instead of letting that girl get the shot to get that platform to be all she could be".
Minaj has been praised by other hip hop artists over the years. Rick Ross said he was impressed seeing Minaj write her verse on "Monster" and deliver her performance, deeming it the moment he knew she was "one of the greatest". Kanye West considered Minaj "the scariest artist in the game right now". "She has the most potential out of everyone to be the number-two rapper of all time, cause nobody’s gonna be bigger than Eminem". 50 Cent called Minaj an "alpha female", adding that "[she] happens to be a girl, but that n***a is tough". RZA complimented her "versatility of lyricism and approach" Ice-T said that Minaj "does her thing. She has her own way of doing it. She has an ill vocal delivery. She kind of reminds me of a female Busta Rhymes, like how she throws her voice in different directions." Chance the Rapper highlighted Minaj's work "beyond hip hop ... streaming rights, like the rights of us like to let us connect the money were owed, the rights of Billboard to start accounting streams that they weren't counting - that was Nicki Minaj. So I respect Nicki in a whole different way."

Achievements
Minaj is the recipient of numerous accolades, including nine American Music Awards, a Brit Award, twelve BET Awards, four Billboard Music Awards, eight MTV Video Music Awards, ten MTV Europe Music Awards, four People's Choice Awards, one Soul Train Music Award. She has received a total of 12 Grammy Award nominations, including for Best New Artist, Best Rap Album, and Best Rap Performance. She has won the MTV Video Music Award for Best Hip-Hop Video four times ("Super Bass", "Anaconda", "Chun-Li" and "Do We Have a Problem?") and won a Best Female Video Award ("Starships"). Minaj is the only rapper to win the BET Award for Best Female Hip Hop Artist eight times. In 2012, Forbes included Minaj in its 30 Under 30 listicle of music. In 2016, Time named Minaj one of the most influential people in the world in its annual Time 100, and featured her on one of the physical covers of the issue. In 2019, Billboard Women in Music awarded her with the Game Changer Award.
Minaj's debut studio album Pink Friday's debut sales week is the largest album sales week of the 21st century among female rappers (375,000 units), and second-largest of all time after Lauryn Hill's The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill (1998). It also spent the most weeks in the Billboard 200 top-ten region for any female rap album (14). Her fifth album Pink Friday 2 garnered the largest album sales week (overall units and pure sales) album streaming week of the decade for a female rapper. In 2010, Minaj became the first female solo artist to have seven songs on the Billboard Hot 100 simultaneously, and the first woman to appear on MTV's Annual Hottest MC List since its inception in 2007. Her 2011 collaboration with Drake, "Make Me Proud", posted the seventh-biggest single-week upward movement on the Hot 100, moving 88 spots from number 97 to its number 9 peak. In 2011, she was ranked sixth on the Rolling Stone master ranking of the "Kings of Hip Hop" which is based on record sales and social media metrics. In 2013, Minaj became the most-charted female rapper on the Billboard Hot 100 at the time, with 44 entries, tying Mariah Carey as seventh among women of all genres. She has 23 top-ten singles on the chart, the most for any female rapper, with six of those being solo songs. In 2017, she broke the record for the most Hot 100 entries by any female artist, surpassing Aretha Franklin, and in 2018, she became the first woman to accumulate 100 entries on the Hot 100. She held the record for most Hot 100 entries by a female artist until it was broken in December 2020 by singer-songwriter Taylor Swift. Minaj is the female rapper with the most Hot 100 entries, top 40 entries, and Digital Songs chart-toppers, and female artist with the second-most (148, 75, and 17), behind Swift. Her 2019 collaboration with Karol G, "Tusa", was the first song by two lead female artists to debut atop the Hot Latin Songs chart and became the longest-running number-one single on the Argentina Hot 100, having spent 25 weeks at the summit. In 2020, Minaj became the second female rapper to reach number one on the Hot 100 more than once with her 6ix9ine collaboration "Trollz", and the second woman to debut atop the chart since Lauryn Hill in 1998. That year, she also was the most-streamed female rapper on Spotify. In 2022, with the number-one Hot 100 debut of her single "Super Freaky Girl", she became the first solo female rapper to debut atop the chart since Lauryn Hill in 1998, the first female rapper to debut a solo song at number one in the 21st century, and the first Black female artist to debut at the summit of the chart with a solo song since Fantasia in 2004. Additionally, Minaj became the first female act to debut atop the chart without an accompanying music video since Ariana Grande's "Thank U, Next" in 2018. The most number-ones, top-tens, and appearances on Hot Rap Songs (10, 51, and 95) and Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs (8, 47, and 145) by a woman are among her feats. In 2024, Minaj became the first female rapper to earn three number-one albums on the Billboard 200, the most among female rappers. Her fifth studio album Pink Friday 2 earned the highest first-week vinyl sales for a female rap album in US history. Minaj's Pink Friday 2 World Tour (2024) grossed over US$108 million, becoming the highest-grossing tour by a female rapper of all time and the first to surpass US$100 million in revenue. The fourth-highest-grossing tour by a rap or hip hop artist, it made Minaj just the fifth Black female artist in history to surpass the mark from a single tour.  
Minaj is the first woman to have appeared on the Forbes "Hip Hop Cash Kings" list since its inception in 2007, having made four consecutive appearances between 2011 and 2014. In 2019, she became the first female rapper to achieve 100 million certified units by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), across her albums and songs. As of 2024, she has over 133 million certified units, across albums, songs, and features (with physical, downloads, and streaming-equivalent sales combined), including 9 million albums and 49.5 million digital singles units as a lead artist in the United States; making her the 50th highest-certified artist, 12th highest-certified female artist, and second-highest-certified female rapper, behind Cardi B, on RIAA's Top Artists (Digital Singles) ranking. Two of Minaj's songs have been certified diamond or higher by the RIAA: "Super Bass" (twelve-times platinum) and "Bang Bang" (with Jessie J and Ariana Grande). The former is the highest-certified song by a female rapper and just the second solo track to be certified diamond in RIAA history. 
Minaj is the most-subscribed female rapper on YouTube, with over 27.1 million subscribers; videos uploaded on her channel have cumulatively received over 11.4 billion views. In 2021, the music video for "Anaconda" became the first female rap solo song to surpass one billion views on YouTube. As of 2024, it is the second-highest-viewed solo music video by a female rapper on the platform, behind Cardi B's "Bodak Yellow". In total, Minaj has nine music videos with over one billion views across all credits on YouTube, the most among female rappers, and the first to do so. She is the first female rapper to have two solo music videos with over one billion views. Two of her music videos have surpassed two billion views: "Bang Bang" (with Jessie J and Ariana Grande) and "Side to Side" (with Grande); the latter is her highest-viewed video. Minaj was the fifth-most-streamed woman and most-streamed female rapper of the 2010s decade on Apple Music. As of 2023, Minaj is the most-streamed female rapper on Spotify, with over 30 billion streams across all credits. She has five songs that have surpassed over one billion streams on the platform. Pink Friday 2 earned the most single-day Spotify streams for a female hip-hop album. Minaj is the 50th-most-followed artist and most-followed female rapper on Spotify, with over 32.4 million followers.

Other activities
Endorsements
Minaj has been affiliated with several manufacturing companies and has endorsed several products during her career. In November 2010, she collaborated with MAC Cosmetics and launched the lipstick "Pink 4 Friday", which was sold for four consecutive Fridays to promote her debut studio album Pink Friday. In 2011, Mattel crafted a Barbie doll with the avatar of Minaj, inspired by the rapper's likeness for charity, which she described as a "major moment" in her career. It was auctioned on the Charitybuzz website; proceeds benefited nonprofit Project Angel Food. A spokesperson for Mattel stated that, "Barbie is obviously a pop culture icon [...] and Nicki is a big part of pop culture and also huge within the fashion industry, as well as a big Barbie fan." Matthew Perpetua of Rolling Stone stated that the "Minaj Barbie doll is notable in that the rapper has made Barbie dolls a crucial part of her aesthetic." Minaj helped introduce the Casio TRYX in Times Square, and created a six-piece nail polish collection for OPI Products with colors named after her songs.
In February 2012, Minaj launched her own range of lip products for MAC Cosmetics' Viva Glam. In April 2012, Minaj helped launch the Nokia Lumia 900 in Times Square. The following month, Minaj appeared in television and internet advertisements for Pepsi's "LiveForNow" campaign, which featured a remix of her single "Moment 4 Life". She endorsed the 2012 Viva Glam campaign with Ricky Martin—which benefited the Mac AIDS Fund—and was the face of the lip product line that year along with him. With designer Jeremy Scott, Minaj signed an endorsement deal with Adidas for the brand's fall and winter 2012 campaign to appear in internet advertisements and commercials for Adidas Originals. Set to her song, "Masquerade", her segment of the advertisement was filmed in Brooklyn and also featured Big Sean, Derrick Rose, Sky Ferreira and 2NE1 in other locations worldwide. She fronted the Viva Glam spring campaign by herself, which also introduced her limited-edition lip product collection, "Nicki 2", which was launched in early 2013.
In February 2013, Minaj starred in Bluewater Comics' Fame biographical-comic series, with her comic book, titled Fame: Nicki Minaj. She partnered with Beats Electronics to introduce her "Pink Pill" speakers in April 2013, appearing with DeRay Davis in a commercial for the speakers that same month. She introduced her lifestyle product line, "The Nicki Minaj Collection" for Kmart, composed of clothing, accessories and houseware. 
Throughout 2014, Minaj released spring, summer, and fall-themed clothing collections for Kmart. Minaj was the face of Roberto Cavalli's spring-summer 2015 campaign. In March 2015, it was announced that Minaj was a co-owner of the music streaming service Tidal. The service specializes in lossless audio and high definition music videos. In addition to Minaj and company owner Jay-Z, sixteen stakeholders including Beyoncé, Madonna, Rihanna, and Kanye West own a 3% equity stake in the service. In November 2015, Minaj released a holiday capsule clothing collection for Kmart and its affiliated e-commerce platform, ShopYourWay; and a limited-edition couture collection which was available via Kmart and her website. In December 2016, Minaj and Glu Mobile released Nicki Minaj: The Empire, a role-playing mobile game for IOS and Android. The objective of the game is to become a rap star. Minaj released an exclusive song "Ain't Gone Do It" for the game.
In September 2017, she released two lipsticks called "Nicki's Nude" and "The Pinkprint" (named after her third studio album) in collaboration with MAC Cosmetics. In November 2017, Minaj starred in H&M's holiday campaign along with Anna Ewers, Mariacarla Boscono, Jesse Williams, Charlee Fraser, and Elibeidy Dani. In March 2018, the rapper appeared in a commercial for the Mercedes-Benz A-Class car. In August 2018, Minaj starred in the trailer for EA Sports' Madden NFL 19 video game alongside Lil Dicky, Quavo and other celebrities. The following month, she appeared alongside Gucci Mane, Bella Thorne, Tommy Dorfman, Yoo Ah-in, and Jonathan Bellini in the campaign for Italian clothing brand Diesel's "Haute Coture" collection; she also co-designed a t-shirt and denim jacket, titled "The Bad Guy". In November 2018, she co-starred with Quavo and Saturday Night Live member Chris Redd in the holiday campaign for Madden NFL 19.
In 2019, Minaj announced a collaboration with luxury fashion house Fendi. Chief executive officer Serge Brunschwig stated the brand "shares great affinity with her. [Minaj] represents the fun aspect of the brand", and that the collaboration "made sense". A capsule collection titled "Fendi Prints On"—after by the lyric containing the same words on her 2018 single, "Chun-Li"—was released on October 14, 2019.
In March 2022, Minaj fronted the campaign for the "Heaven" spring 2022 collection by Marc Jacobs. In May, she was named the new creative director of American men's magazine Maxim and became the global ambassador and advisor for MaximBet, a sports betting brand launched by the magazine. She also came on board as a stakeholder. MaximBet was shutdown in December 2022. In July 2022, Minaj collaborated with Rap Snacks and released her own potato chip flavor, "Barbie-Que Honey Truffle". The following month, Mattel sued Rap Snacks, claiming the company violated the Barbie trademark and had made a "deliberate and calculated" choice to do so. The lawsuit was settled in September after the company changed the snack's name to "Bar-B-Quin". Minaj released a "variety pack" with Rap Snacks in October, and a "Nocho Nachos" nachos flavor in March 2023, inspired by her 2023 single, "Red Ruby Da Sleeze". Also in October, the rapper appeared alongside Lil Baby, Kane Brown, Pete Davidson, and Bukayo Saka in a trailer for the first-person shooter video game, Call of Duty: Modern Warfare II. A playable character model of Minaj in her "Red Ruby" persona was released as downloadable content for the game in July 2023 to commemorate the 50th anniversary of hip-hop music's origin; her character marked the first woman "operator" of the game. In December 2023, she and Roblox introduced the virtual world Gag City on the game platform to promote her fifth album, Pink Friday 2 (2023). Days before the launch, Minaj's fanbase circulated AI-generated content of the fan-made cityscape Gag City, a pink futuristic metropolis inspired by the cover artwork of the album, which the rapper coined on her social media.

Products
Minaj has a line of fragrances first launched in September 2012. She partnered with 'Give Back Brands' to introduce her first fragrance "Pink Friday", which was nominated for three FiFi Awards for Fragrance of the Year, Best Packaging, and Media Campaign of the Year. Flanker editions "Pink Friday: Special Edition" and "Pink Friday: Deluxe Edition" were released in April and December 2013 respectively. In June 2013, Minaj and Mona Scott-Young launched MYX Fusions, a line of fruit-infused, single-serve moscato wine beverages. Minaj is a co-owner, creative director, and ambassador of the brand.
Minaj's fourth fragrance "Minajesty" was launched in September 2013, followed by "Minajesty: Exotic Edition", which was released exclusively to the Home Shopping Network in June 2014. This was followed by the launch of her sixth fragrance "Onika" in September 2014. A year later in 2015, Minaj released her seventh fragrance, "The Pinkprint", named after her third studio album. Her eighth fragrance, "Trini Girl", was released in 2016. In 2018, she released her ninth fragrance, "Queen", named after her fourth studio album. Minaj's tenth fragrance "Pink Friday 2" was released to JCPenney in December 2023, in support of her fifth album of the same name. It was released early on the outlet's webstore and retail stores for a limited time, with no prior announcement, in late November. Minaj revealed she did not know about the initial release. The fragrance was also released on Amazon in December 2023.
In March 2024, Minaj launched her press-on nails line, Pink Friday Nails. A vegan and cruelty-free brand, it was launched DTC via its webstore, and later made available via Shopify as well. Pop-up stations dedicated to the range were held exclusively to VIP ticket holders on the Pink Friday 2 World Tour. In April, she and British apparel brand Loci released a sneaker collection. Minaj is an investor and co-owner of the brand, whose footwear is handmade using vegan materials.

Heavy On It Records
On March 3, 2023, Minaj announced the launch of her record label imprint on an episode of her radio show, "Queen Radio". Minaj did not reveal the name of the label but did say her long-time friend Patty "Patty Duke" Lauren has signed on as the label's A&R. Minaj also unveiled her starting roster: Nana Fofie, Tate Kobang, Rico Danna, and London Hill.
On March 13, 2023, Minaj revealed the name of her imprint as "Heavy On It Records". The label currently has a venture with Republic Records.

Personal life
In an interview with Rolling Stone, Minaj revealed that she had an abortion as a teenager, which she had referenced in her songs "Autobiography" and "All Things Go". She said that it was the hardest thing she had gone through, and although it "haunted" her she stands by her decision as she "didn't have anything to offer a child" and she is pro-choice. In July 2011, her cousin Nicholas Telemaque was murdered near his home in Brooklyn, an incident she referenced in "All Things Go" and "Champion". Minaj's father, Robert Maraj, died in February 2021 in a hit-and-run accident while walking along a road on Long Island. Charles Polevich, a 70-year-old man, was charged with leaving the scene of incident involving death of a person and tampering with or suppressing physical evidence. Minaj commented on her father's death, saying, "it has been the most devastating loss of my life. I find myself wanting to call him all the time, more so now that he's gone. [...] May his soul rest in paradise. He was very loved & will be very missed."
At a New York Fashion Week after-party in 2018, rapper Cardi B threw one of her high heel shoes in Minaj's direction and attempted to physically attack her; bodyguards intervened, leaving Cardi B with a bump on her forehead. She then alleged on Instagram that Minaj had "liked" negative social media comments about her ability to take care of her newborn daughter. Minaj denied the allegations on her Queen Radio show, stating that she would "would never...speak ill of anyone's child", and expressed embarrassment at the incident. She accused Cardi of building "her career off of sympathy and payola", bribing DJs and radios with sex to play her records, and not writing her raps, saying, "Do you know what it’s like to sit in your room for hours writing raps? You came into my fucking culture. I never had to fuck a DJ to play my songs." Minaj also called Cardi a "disgusting pig" for allegedly cyberbullying a caller on Minaj's show by attacking her dead child, and posts calling dark-skinned black women "cockroaches". 
In September 2021, Minaj responded to a fan's question about her lack of appearances at public events, stating that she did not want to put her infant at risk due to the COVID-19 pandemic, and that she had tested positive for the virus and had to quarantine from her son. She said she was getting the COVID-19 vaccine after she felt she had done enough research, and she would be vaccinated before she went on tour. She had also tweeted that her cousin in Trinidad told her that his friend suffered swollen testicles and became impotent after taking the vaccine, a claim that received backlash and was denied by Trinidad and Tobago health minister Terrence Deyalsingh, who stated that there was no evidence of that. In May 2022, Olivia Truffaut-Wong of The Cut stated that Minaj had likely gotten vaccinated as the 2022 Met Gala (which Minaj attended) required proof of vaccination and a negative COVID-19 PCR test to attend.

Relationships
Minaj dated rapper Safaree Samuels from 2003 to 2014. She said he proposed to her but she declined. She dated rapper Meek Mill from early 2015 until January 2017. In December 2018, Minaj began dating her childhood friend Kenneth Petty (born April 7, 1978). She announced their marriage in October 2019, hyphenating his last name to hers. In July 2020, she announced via Instagram that she was expecting her first child. She gave birth to a son on September 30, 2020, whom she refers to publicly as "Papa Bear".

Legal issues
Minaj's husband Kenneth Petty was convicted of attempted rape at age 16 in 1995, serving four years in prison and registering as a sex offender upon release. When Minaj and her husband moved to California, he failed to update his residence on the sex offender registration and was indicted in February 2020; he registered in the state's database by the following month. In August 2021, Jennifer Hough, the woman Petty attempted to rape, filed a lawsuit against the couple alleging harassment, intimidation and infliction of emotional distress, and requested a $20 million default judgement when Minaj did not respond to the lawsuit in time, which the court declined, declaring that Minaj was not in default. Minaj filed a response, calling the allegations "blatant falsehoods" and including evidence of discrepancies in Hough's story. Minaj stated that she "never asked [Hough] to change her story", "never offered her any money in return for a statement", and "did not threaten her with any type of harm". She said that, after her husband's indictment, Hough contacted her via a mutual acquaintance, and in their phone call, Hough indirectly asked Minaj for a payoff by telling her that the indictment against her husband was a "big problem" for both of them. Minaj stated that Hough "mistakenly believed that I would pay her money to take back her accusation against my husband." She said she responded "by telling [Hough] that the indictment was my husband's problem, not mine, and that he would have to live with the consequences of having chosen years ago to plead guilty to a crime which he did not commit", and that Hough said "I'm not saying it didn’t happen, but maybe it was just a misunderstanding". Hough voluntarily dismissed the case against Minaj.
On May 25, 2024, Minaj was arrested after marijuana was found in her luggage at Schiphol Airport in Amsterdam, Netherlands, where she was boarding a plane to perform a concert in Manchester, England. She was fined and released the same day.

Discography
Studio albums

Pink Friday (2010)
Pink Friday: Roman Reloaded (2012)
The Pinkprint (2014)
Queen (2018)
Pink Friday 2 (2023)

Filmography
Ice Age: Continental Drift (2012)
The Other Woman (2014)
Barbershop: The Next Cut (2016)
The Angry Birds Movie 2 (2019)

Tours
Headlining
Pink Friday Tour (2011–2012)
Pink Friday: Reloaded Tour (2012)
The Pinkprint Tour (2015–2016)
Pink Friday 2 World Tour (2024)

Co-headlining
The Nicki Wrld Tour (2019)

Opening act
Lil Wayne – America's Most Wanted Tour (2008)
Lil Wayne – I Am Music II Tour (2011)
Britney Spears – Femme Fatale Tour (2011)

See also
Notes
References
Further reading
Hope, Clover (2021). The Motherlode: 100+ Women Who Made Hip-Hop. Harry N. Abrams. ISBN 978-1-4197-4296-5.

External links

Official website 
Nicki Minaj at AllMusic
Nicki Minaj discography at Discogs
Nicki Minaj at IMDb